---
# Birds of a Feather: An Examination of ADHD Symptoms and Associated Concerns in Partners of Adults with ADHD
**Autores**: Christina M. Steele, Brian T. Wymbs, and R. Elizabeth Capps
**Año**: 2020
**Journal**: J Atten Disord 0.0:1087054720978553
**DOI/Link**: ADHD,assortative mating,intimate partner violence,substance use

## Abstract
Abstract
Objective: Adults often select romantic partners who behave like they do (i.e. assortative mating). However, little is 
known about whether assortative mating is common among adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
and whether it is related to associated problems. Method: About 94 adults without ADHD, 43 adults with childhood 
ADHD histories but without current symptoms or impairment (ADHD-Desist), 27 adults with childhood ADHD histories 
and elevated current symptoms and impairment (ADHD-Persist) rated their partners’ ADHD symptoms and their own 
associated problems (e.g., intimate partner violence, financial difficulties).

## Key Findings
Discussion
Our findings indicate that assortative mating is common 
among adults diagnosed with ADHD in childhood, particu-
larly among those with symptoms and impairment persist-
ing into adulthood. Specifically, adults in the ADHD-Persist 
group reported that their partners had more clinically sig-
nificant symptoms of IA and HI than adults in the ADHD-
Desist group or the Non-ADHD group. In fact, more than 
90% of adults in the ADHD-Persist group reported that their 
partners had four or more clinically significant symptoms 
of IA or HI. Effect sizes and odds ratios all indicated moder-
ate to large differences between the ADHD-Persist group 
and the ADHD-Desist and Non ADHD groups. Altogether, 
our results indicate that adults with childhood ADHD histo-
ries and elevated current symptoms select romantic partners 
who also exhibit clinically-significant symptoms of ADHD, 
which is suggestive of assortative mating. These findings 
extend those reported by Wymbs and Molina (2015), who... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
methods were con-
sidered non-credible or inconsistent reporters and were 
excluded from analyses.
To assess for functional impairment, we administered 
the Impairment Rating Scale (IRS) adapted for adults 
(Dawson et al., 2020). The IRS is a 12-item measure assess-
ing impairment in core functional domains such as home 
(e.g., “your relationships with your parents”), school/work 
(e.g., “your academic progress at school”), and interper-
sonal relations (e.g., “your relationships with other people 
your age”). Participants are asked to indicate their level of 
impairment, if applicable, by marking on a continuum from 
“no problem” to “extreme problem,” which is later re-coded 
numerically (0–6), with scores of 3 or higher indicating 
clinically significant impairment. The adult IRS has demon-
strated good convergent, divergent, and incremental valid-
ity among college students and an online sample of adults, 
as well as good interrater reliability between ratings pro-
vided by romantic partners (Dawson et al., 2020).
MTurk workers reporting no diagnostic histories of 
ADHD, less than four clinically significant DSM-IV symp-
toms of IA and HI, and no functional impairment comprised 
the “Control” group. Workers with childhood histories of 
ADHD, but less than four clinically significant symptoms 
of IA or HI, or no functional impairment, were in the 
“ADHD-Desist” group. Workers with childhood histories 
Table 1.  Demographic Characteristics Across Groups.
Control (n = 94)
ADHD-Desist (n = 43)
ADHD-Persist (n = 27)
p
% Female
48.4
48.8
51.9
.95
Age in years (SD)
28.3 (6.0)
28.7 (5.5)
27.7 (5.1)
.78
% Caucasian
85.3
86.0
88.9
.89
% Exclusively heterosexual
80.0
79.1
70.4
.56
% Married
41.1
41.9
22.2
.17
Years in current relationship (SD)
5.37 (4,74)
4.83 (3.85)
4.18 (4.19)
.44
% >= Associate’s degree
53.7
41.9
44.4
.38
Note. Control = Never diagnosed with ADHD, < 4 current ADHD symptoms; ADHD-Desist = Diagnosed with ADHD by age 17, < 4 current ADHD 
symptoms and/or no current impairment; ADHD-Persist = Diagnosed with ADHD by age 17, ≥4 current ADHD symptoms and current impairment. 
Chi-square tests were conducted with dichotomous outcomes and analyses of variance were conducted with the continuous outcomes.
Steele et al.	
5
of ADHD, four or more clinically significant symptoms of 
IA and/or HI, and functional impairment comprised the 
“ADHD-Persist” group. The four-symptom cutoff criterion 
used in this study has a substantial evidence base for repre-
senting meaningfully different groups (Barkley et al., 2008).
Partner ADHD symptoms.  For the purpose of this study, we 
adapted the CAARS Observer Short Version (CAARS-
OSV; Conners et  al., 1999a) to allow for respondents to 
answer questions regarding the degree to which their cur-
rent romantic partners exhibit DSM-IV symptoms of ADHD. 
The adaptation was minor in that the beginning of items 
were altered from its original state (e.g., “The person being 
described interrupts others when talking”) to directly ask 
about how common it is for the respondent’s partner to 
exhibit the behavior (“My partner interrupts others when 
talking”). Responses were scored on a 4-point scale (0 = not 
at all; 1 = just a little; 2 = pretty much; 3 = very much). Con-
sistent with the CAARS Self report long version, responses 
of “pretty much” or “very much” on the partner version 
were considered clinically significant symptoms. The 
CAARS-OSV has been shown to have adequate internal 
consistency (α = 0.78) and test–retest reliability (mean 
r = 0.73, p < .001) (Amador-Campos et al., 2014). Internal 
consistency in this sample was good for symptoms of IA 
(α = 0.88) and HI (α = 0.83).
Associated problems.  The 78-item Conflict Tactics Scale-2 
(CTS-2; Straus et al., 1996) is the most widely used and 
psychometrically sound measure of IPV perpetration and 
victimization. We focused on examining risk factors of psy-
chological IPV perpetration (α = 0.75) and victimization 
(α = 0.75) as well as physical IPV perpetration (α = 0.70) 
and victimization (α = 0.75). The response scale for each 
item ranges from 0 (this has never happened) to 6 (this has 
happened more than 20 times in the past year). We followed 
the guidelines recommended by Straus et  al. (1996) for 
scoring the CTS-2 by summing the midpoints for item 
responses chosen by the participant. The midpoints are the 
same as the item response numbers for 0, 1 (once in past 
year), and 2 (twice in past year). For “3-5 times in the past 
year,” the midpoint is 4, for “6–10 times in the past year,” 
the midpoint is 8, for “11–20 times in the past year,” the 
midpoint is 15, and for “more than 20 times in the past 
year,” Straus et al. (1996) recommend 25 as the midpoint.
Financial difficulties were assessed using a measure 
adapted from a scale administered by Barkley et al. (2008). 
It contains 11 questions assessing spending and saving hab-
its. The first seven questions are completed with a “yes” or 
“no” response (e.g., “Do you have trouble managing 
money?” “Have you ever had to declare bankruptcy?”) and 
were coded dichotomously (0 = no; 1 = yes). The remaining 
four questions ask participants to provide approximately 
how many times certain financial behaviors have occurred 
(i.e., “missed a rent payment;” “missed a utility payment;” 
“missed a loan/credit card payment;” and “written checks 
without sufficient funds”). Answers for these items were 
transformed to be interpreted dichotomously (i.e., 0 = never; 
1 = one or more times this occurred). All 11 items were then 
summed for a total score reflecting the relative degree of 
financial difficulty, with higher scores indicating more 
problems. Internal consistency of the financial difficulties 
scale was good (α = 0.76).
Alcohol abuse was assessed using the 3-item hazardous 
alcohol use scale of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification 
Test (AUDIT-H; Saunders et al., 1993), which queries fre-
quency of drinking, typical quantity of drinks, and fre-
quency of heavy drinking (i.e., having six or more drinks 
during one occasion). Total scores range from 0 to 12, with 
clinical cutoff scores ≥5 or ≥4 for men and women, respec-
tively (59.3% of the sample exceeded the clinical cutoff). 
The AUDIT-H has well-established psychometric proper-
ties, including a high degree of test-retest reliability (over a 
3- to 4-week interval r = 0.98; Reinert & Allen, 2007). 
Internal consistency of the AUDIT-H in this study was good 
(α = 0.77).
Participants also reported on the frequency of their use 
of ten illicit drugs (i.e., marijuana, inhalants, hallucinogens, 
cocaine, opiates, tranquilizers, MDMA, methamphetamine, 
club drugs, and misuse of prescription drugs) in the past 
year. Response options ranged from “0” (Not at all) to “11” 
(Several times per day). In this study, we created a categori-
cal variable indicating whether participants indicated any 
illicit drug use (39.5% of sample indicated any use).
Data Analytic Plan
To examine whether adults with ADHD histories, including 
those with elevated current symptoms, report having part-
ners with elevated ADHD symptoms, multiple analyses of 
variance (MANOVAs) were conducted with respondent sta-
tus (Control, ADHD-Desist, ADHD-Persist) as the indepen-
dent variable and partner clinically-significant ADHD 
symptoms as the dependent variable. Separate analyses 
were conducted for IA and HI symptoms. Follow-up Tukey 
tests were conducted to probe the source of significant main 
effects, and Cohen’s d was calculated to assess the magni-
tude of significant differences. Next, chi-square analyses 
were conducted to evaluate whether the occurrence of part-
ners rated as exceeding 4 or more symptoms of IA or HI 
varied on respondent status. Odds ratios (OR) were calcu-
lated to assess the magnitude of significantly different rates.
To examine self and partner ADHD as a predictor of asso-
ciated problems, a variable was created combining participant 
reports of their ADHD status and their partner’s ADHD symp-
toms. We combined control and ADHD-Desist groups, since 
our first set of analyses did not indicate significant between-
group differences in overall partner symptom profiles, and 
6	
Journal of Attention Disorders 00(0)
split them into two groups: (1) Those with partners exhibiting 
three or fewer symptoms of IA and HI (i.e., Control/ADHD-
Desist + Partner Non ADHD; n = 115) and (2) Those with 
partners exhibiting four or more symptoms of IA or HI (i.e., 
Control/ADHD-Desist + Partner ADHD; n = 22). The final 
group consisted of participants in the ADHD-Persist group 
who reported that their partners have four or more symptoms 
of IA or HI (i.e., ADHD-Persist + Partner ADHD; n = 25). 
Only two participants in the ADHD-Persist group reported 
that their partners had three or fewer symptoms of IA and 
HI, so we did not form a separate group for these analyses. 
Next, MANOVAs were conducted with couple ADHD sta-
tus (Control/ADHD-Desist + Partner Non ADHD; Control/
ADHD-Desist + Partner ADHD; ADHD-Persist + Partner 
ADHD) as the independent variable and associated problems 
as the dependent variables (i.e., psychological and physical 
IPV perpetration and victimization, financial difficulties). 
Follow-up univariate analyses of variance (ANOVAs) and 
Tukey tests were conducted to probe the source of significant 
main effects, and Cohen’s d was calculated to assess the mag-
nitude of significant differences. Finally, chi-square analyses 
were conducted to evaluate whether alcohol abuse and illicit 
drug use varied on couple ADHD status. ORs were calculated 
to assess the magnitude of significantly different rates of sub-
stance outcomes.
Results
ADHD Status and Partner ADHD Symptoms
MANOVA indicated that partners’ clinically significant 
ADHD symptoms differed by respondent ADHD status, 
F(4, 324) = 24.51, p < .01. Univariate analyses of variance 
indicated differences in partners’ clinically significant IA 
symptoms, F(2, 324) = 40.68, p < .01, and HI symptoms, 
F(2, 324) = 54.26, p < .01, by respondent ADHD status. 
Follow-up Tukey tests probing for differences between the 
three ADHD status groups showed that adults in the 
ADHD-Persist group rated their partners as having more 
clinically significant IA symptoms (M = 3.70, SD = 1.38) 
than adults in the ADHD-Desist group (M = 1.60, SD = 1.14; 
d = 1.66) and the non-ADHD group (M = 1.44, SD = 1.12; 
d = 1.80). Similarly, adults in the ADHD-Persist group were 
found to rate their partners as having more clinically signifi-
cant HI symptoms (M = 4.81, SD = 1.57) than adults in the 
ADHD-Desist group (M = 1.70, SD = 1.75; d = 1.87) and the 
non-ADHD group (M = 1.46, SD = 1.35; d = 2.29). ADHD-
Desist and non-ADHD groups did not rate their partners’ IA 
or HI symptoms differently.
Chi-square analyses revealed that adults in the ADHD-
Persist group were more likely to report that their partners 
had four or more IA symptoms (55.56%) than adults in the 
ADHD-Desist (9.30%; OR = 12.19, Confidence Interval 
[CI]95% [3.39, 43.78]) or non-ADHD group (5.26%; 
OR = 22.50, CI95% [6.92, 73.06]), χ2(2) = 44.07, p < .01. 
Adults in the ADHD-Persist group were also more likely to 
report that their partners had four or more HI symptoms 
(81.48%) than adults in the ADHD-Desist (16.28%; 
OR = 22.63, CI95% [6.39, 80.12]) or non-ADHD group 
(9.47%; OR = 47.85, CI95% [14.25, 160.68]), χ2(2) = 65.78, 
p < .01. Finally, adults in the ADHD-Persist group were 
more likely to report that their partner had 4 or more symp-
toms of IA or HI (92.59%) than adults in the ADHD-Desist 
(20.93%; OR = 47.22, CI95% [9.37, 237.87]) or non-ADHD 
group (13.68%; OR = 78.85, CI95% [16.66, 373.20]), 
χ2(2) = 65.89, p < .01. The ADHD-Desist and non-ADHD 
group did not differ in any of these analyses.
Self and Partner ADHD Status in Relation to 
Associated Problems
A MANOVA indicated a significant main effect of self and 
partner ADHD status on self-reported IPV outcomes and 
financial difficulties, F(10, 312) = 3.91, p < .01. As shown in 
Table 2, the same pattern of results was evident in all five 
Table 2.  Descriptive Statistics and Results of Analyses of Variance.
Control/ADHD-
Desist + Partner Non 
ADHD (n = 115)
Control/ADHD-
Desist + Partner 
ADHD (n = 22)
ADHD-
Persist + Partner 
ADHD (n = 25)
Significance
Psychological perpetration
12.08 (15.64)a
13.36 (16.19)a
28.72 (24.28)b
F (2,160) = 9.63, p < .01
Physical perpetration
0.90 (3.19)a
0.23 (0.87)a
5.92 (13.13)b
F (2,160) = 8.50, p < .01
Psychological victimization
13.06 (17.04)a
15.41 (23.01)a
32.80 (25.39)b
F (2,160) = 10.73, p < .01
Physical victimization
0.88 (3.99)a
0.41 (0.96)a
5.56 (13.74)b
F (2,160) = 6.05, p < .01
Financial difficulties
1.97 (2.08)a
1.68 (1.86)a
3.84 (2.62)b
F (2,160) = 8.60, p < .01
Note. Control = Never diagnosed with ADHD, <4 current ADHD symptoms; ADHD-Desist = diagnosed with ADHD by age 17, <4 current ADHD 
symptoms and/or no current impairment; ADHD-Persist = Diagnosed with ADHD by age 17, ≥4 current ADHD symptoms and current impairment. 
Partner Non ADHD = Partner reported to have three or fewer clinically significant symptoms of inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity; Partner 
ADHD = Partner reported to have four or more clinically significant symptoms of inattention and/or hyperactivity/impulsivity. Different superscripts in 
a row indicate a significant (Tukey p < .05) difference between groups.
Steele et al.	
7
outcomes: adults in the ADHD-Persist + Partner ADHD 
group reported more psychological and physical IPV perpe-
tration and victimization as well as financial difficulties than 
adults in the Control/ADHD-Desist + Partner Non ADHD 
and adults in the Control/ADHD-Desist + Partner ADHD 
groups. Effect sizes were medium to large (range d = 00.46–
0.91) when comparing the ADHD-Persist + Partner ADHD 
group to the Control/ADHD-Desist + Partner Non ADHD 
group and medium to large (range d = 0.53–0.95) when com-
paring the ADHD-Persist + Partner ADHD group to the 
Control/ADHD-Desist + Partner ADHD group.
Chi-square tests revealed a different pattern of results 
for the substance use outcomes. Omnibus tests indicated 
the presence of between-group differences in alcohol 
abuse, χ2(2) = 10.55, p < .01, and illicit drug use, 
χ2(2) = 11.60, p < .01. Follow-up chi-square tests indi-
cated that adults in the ADHD-Persist + Partner ADHD 
group were more likely to report alcohol abuse (76.0%) 
than adults in the Control/ADHD-Desist + Partner Non 
ADHD group (51.3%; OR = 3.01, CI95% [1.12, 8.07]), 
χ2(1) = 4.12, p < .05. Adults in the Control/ADHD-
Desist + Partner ADHD group were more likely to report 
alcohol abuse (81.8%) than adults in the Control/ADHD-
Desist + Partner Non-ADHD group (51.3%; OR = 4.27, 
CI95% [1.36, 13.40]), χ2(1) = 5.80, p < .05. There was no 
difference in rates of alcohol abuse between the ADHD-
Persist + Partner 
ADHD 
and 
the 
Control/ADHD-
Desist + Partner ADHD groups. The same pattern was 
observed with illicit drug use, such that rates of illicit drug 
use among adults in the Control/ADHD-Desist + Partner 
Non ADHD group (31.3%) were much lower than rates 
observed in the Control/ADHD-Desist + Partner ADHD 
group (54.6%; OR = 2.63, CI95% [1.04, 6.66]), χ2(1) = 4.38, 
p < .05, and the ADHD-Persist + Partner ADHD group 
(64.0%; OR = 3.90, CI95% [1.58, 9.66]), χ2(1) = 9.40, 
p < .01.

## Results
Results: The ADHD-Persist group reported 
that their partners exhibited more ADHD symptoms than the ADHD-Desist group and those without ADHD. Adults in 
the ADHD-Persist group who had partners with elevated ADHD symptoms endorsed high intimate partner violence and 
financial difficulties.

## Clinical Significance
Conclusion: Assortative mating appears to be common among adults with ADHD, especially those 
with persistent symptoms, and to increase risk of additional problems.
Keywords
ADHD, assortative mating, intimate partner violence, substance use
2	
Journal of Attention Disorders 00(0)
regarding whether adults with ADHD are more likely to 
partner with other adults with elevated ADHD symptoms. 
Furthermore, researchers have yet to examine whether 
adults with ADHD in relationships with partners exhibiting 
similar ADHD profiles are prone to have associated prob-
lems shown to spark relationship distress, such as intimate 
partner violence (IPV), substance abuse, and financial prob-
lems (Leonard et al., 2014; Poortman, 2005; Shortt et al., 
2006). Investigating whether adults with ADHD choose 
partners with elevated ADHD symptoms and whether, if 
relevant, commonly associated problems are connected to 
partner symptoms, could inform the need for individual 
ADHD treatment services to routinely assess for and target 
couple issues. The present study sought to investigate rates 
of ADHD in partners of adults with ADHD and to examine 
whether adults with ADHD who have partners with clini-
cally-elevated ADHD symptoms are prone to report greater 
associated problems often toxic for relationships.
ADHD and Assortative Mating
Romantic partners with similar traits tend to be attracted to 
one another more frequently than would be expected by 
chance via a phenomenon known as assortative mating 
(Boomsma et  al., 2010; van Grootheest et  al., 2008). 
Patterns of assortative mating have been shown among 
adults with psychiatric disorders including alcohol use dis-
order, generalized anxiety disorder, major depressive disor-
der, panic disorder, and specific phobia (for review, see 
Mathews & Reus, 2001). Individuals with these conditions 
are more likely than the general population to be in relation-
ships with others having the same mental health concerns 
(for reviews, see Rhule-Louie & McMahon, 2007; Mathews 
& Reus, 2001). However, studies have yet to investigate 
assortative mating among couples with ADHD as a focal 
point of research.
Adults with ADHD may be more likely to engage in 
romantic relationships with other adults with ADHD given 
the patterns of social interactions that individuals with 
ADHD experience across development. From a young age, 
individuals with ADHD exhibit social skills difficulties that 
may put them at an increased risk of experiencing impair-
ment in social relationships (e.g., Ray et al., 2017). These 
social skills deficits, along with the core symptomatology of 
inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity, are often shown to 
increase risk of peer rejection among youth with ADHD (for 
review, see Hoza, 2007). Following peer rejection, youth 
with ADHD may end up affiliating with peers sharing simi-
lar traits and behaviors (e.g., disruptive behavior, conduct 
problems) who are also socially rejected by peers (e.g., 
Mrug et al., 2012). Furthermore, because early social rela-
tionship patterns, such as affiliating with others who behave 
similarly, appear to influence the development of later 
romantic relationships (for review, see Zimmer-Gembeck, 
2002), individuals with ADHD may also be more likely to 
engage in romantic relationships with individuals with simi-
lar symptomatology later in life.
The profiles of partners of adults with ADHD, particu-
larly features that could contribute to the risk of discord in 
these relationships beyond those of their partner with 
ADHD, are not yet well understood. To our knowledge, 
only one study has assessed risk characteristics of partners 
of adults with ADHD. As part of their small open trial of a 
novel couples therapy-based approach to treating ADHD in 
adulthood, Wymbs and Molina (2015) reported that 67% of 
the adults with ADHD in their sample had partners with 
clinically-significant ADHD symptoms. Considering that 
the prevalence of adult ADHD in the U.S. is estimated to be 
between 2.5% and 4.4% (American Psychiatric Association 
[APA], 2013; Kessler et al., 2006), the rate of clinically-
elevated ADHD symptoms in the Wymbs and Molina 
(2015) sample suggests that adults with ADHD select part-
ners with elevated ADHD symptoms at rates far above 
chance. Still, their sample was treatment seeking, and opt-
ing into a couple’s therapy approach to treatment, which 
suggests that the rates of shared ADHD symptoms in the 
Wymbs and Molina study could be higher than the rates in 
couples not participating in therapy. As such, it remains 
unclear whether adults with ADHD are more likely to enter 
into relationships with individuals who share elevated 
ADHD symptoms than adults without ADHD.
While research investigating rates of assortative mating 
in adults with ADHD will provide important descriptive 
information, the potential for meaningful clinical impact 
will depend on whether difficulties common among adults 
with ADHD and toxic for relationships (i.e., IPV, substance 
abuse, financial problems) vary as a function of their part-
ner’s ADHD symptom severity. To our knowledge, 
researchers have yet to examine whether the functioning of 
adults with ADHD is associated with the level of ADHD 
symptoms that their partner exhibits. It is critical to assess 
whether such assortative pairing confers a unique risk for 
additional problems among adults with ADHD because 
these associations could lead to services for adults with 
ADHD that include assessments and interventions remedi-
ating couple dynamics that may exacerbate their risk for 
associated concerns.
ADHD and Associated Problems
A considerable body of research documents associations 
between adult ADHD and additional problems that contrib-
ute to relationship distress, including IPV, substance abuse, 
and finances. Specifically, adults with childhood ADHD 
histories are statistically more likely than adults without 
childhood ADHD histories to report IPV perpetration (e.g., 
Fang et al., 2010; Wymbs et al., 2012) and victimization 
(Guendelman et  al., 2016; Wymbs et  al., 2019), to have 
Steele et al.	
3
alcohol and illicit drug use problems (Barkley et al., 2008; 
Lee et  al., 2011), and to have more financial difficulties 
(e.g., trouble saving money for monthly bills, exceeding 
credit limits or making late payments on credit cards; 
Altszuler et  al., 2016; Barkley et  al., 2008; Beauchaine 
et al., 2017). The fact that having ADHD histories is associ-
ated with each of these variables is concerning because IPV, 
substance abuse, and financial distress have been shown to 
be robust predictors of relationship discord and divorce 
(Leonard et al., 2014; Poortman, 2005; Shortt et al., 2006).
Notably, the severity of associated problems exhibited 
by adults with ADHD is particularly concerning for those 
diagnosed with ADHD in childhood who have persistent 
symptoms relative to those who have symptoms desist 
between childhood and adulthood. For example, relative to 
adults whose symptoms remitted or those without ADHD, 
adults with persistent ADHD symptoms have been found to 
report statistically greater levels of psychological and phys-
ical IPV perpetration and victimization (Wymbs et  al., 
2019) as well as financial problems, including missing rent 
or credit card payments, exceeding credit limits, and having 
poor credit ratings (Barkley et  al., 2008). Similarly, in a 
10-year follow-up study of young adults with ADHD, 
Wilens et  al. (2011) showed that adults with persistent 
ADHD were three times more likely to be diagnosed with 
alcohol and illicit drug use than adults whose symptoms 
remitted. Altogether, ADHD in adulthood is positively 
associated with additional problems, including those pre-
dictive of relationship distress, but it is those with persistent 
symptoms that are most at risk.
To extend prior research underscoring the risk of associ-
ated problems among adults with persistent ADHD symp-
toms, investigations are needed to determine if having 
partners with elevated ADHD symptoms increases risk of 
additional problems compared to adults with desistant 
ADHD or those without ADHD who have partners with 
elevated ADHD symptoms. This line of inquiry could shed 
light on additional contextual factors (e.g., partner behav-
ior) for clinicians to assess and potentially target in treat-
ment of adults with persistent ADHD symptoms.
Current Study
The present investigation evaluated whether adults with 
ADHD indicate having partners with elevated ADHD 
symptoms and, if so, whether couples including two adults 
with elevated ADHD symptoms are particularly at risk for 
associated problems. We hypothesized that adults diag-
nosed with ADHD as children, particularly those with ele-
vated current symptoms and functional impairment, would 
report having partners with greater symptoms of ADHD 
than adults with ADHD histories whose symptoms remit-
ted, and adults without ADHD histories. Our aim to investi-
gate whether adults with ADHD histories, with or without 
persistent symptoms and impairment, report associated 
problems in the context of partners having elevated ADHD 
symptoms was exploratory, and as such, we did not have 
any specific hypotheses.
Method
Participants
Men and women who were 18 to 45 years of age and resi-
dents of the United States were recruited through 
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk; https://www.mturk.
com). Evidence indicates that the prevalence of MTurk 
adults who reported childhood ADHD diagnoses is con-
sistent with those observed in “offline” samples (Wymbs 
& Dawson, 2019). Rates of other clinical concerns, 
including alcohol abuse (Boynton & Richman, 2014; 
Shapiro et al., 2013), among MTurk adults are consistent 
with national prevalence rates.
A total of 6,526 MTurk adults were screened for ADHD 
diagnostic histories (detailed information about screening 
procedures is described by masked). Of those who were 
screened and agreed to receive contact for future participa-
tion (n = 5,988; 91.8%), 326 adults (5.4%) reported having 
been diagnosed with ADHD by the age of 17, and thus were 
eligible for recruitment into the “ADHD” group. Then, 326 
adults who reported no ADHD diagnostic histories and cur-
rent ADHD symptoms below clinical cutoffs on well-estab-
lished screening measures (total score < 14 on ADHD 
Self-Report Scale–Screener [ASRS-S]; Kessler et al., 2007) 
were matched to the ADHD group based on demographic 
similarity (i.e., sex, age, and educational attainment) and 
recruited for the “control” group.
Of those eligible and invited to participate in the present 
study, 167 (51.2%) adults in the ADHD group and 199 
(61.0%) adults in the control group consented to participate. 
Participants in the ADHD group did not differ from those 
who did not consent by sex, level of education, age, or cur-
rent ADHD symptoms. Individuals in the control group 
who did not consent were more likely than those who con-
sented to be male and to have lower levels of education, but 
their average age and current ADHD symptoms did not dif-
fer. Of those who consented to participate, 45 individuals in 
the ADHD group and 47 individuals in the control group 
were excluded for exceeding cutoffs on at least one or more 
indices of non-credible or inconsistent responding (see 
“ADHD status” section) on the Conners’ Adult ADHD 
Rating Scale Self- Report Long Form (CAARS; Conners 
et al., 1999a). Additionally, 32 participants in the ADHD 
group and 33 participants in the control group were excluded 
for reporting they were not currently dating or were not in 
an exclusive relationship (i.e., did not necessarily have one 
partner). Finally, 15 individuals in the ADHD group and 20 
individuals in the control group were excluded because they 
4	
Journal of Attention Disorders 00(0)
did not complete one or more of the primary study measures 
(see “Measures” section below). In total, 70 adults in the 
ADHD group and 94 adults in the control group who were 
eligible and provided complete data for this study. Within 
the ADHD group, 43 individuals reported currently not hav-
ing clinically significant ADHD symptoms or impairment 
(i.e., ADHD-Desist group), and 27 reported currently hav-
ing clinically significant ADHD symptoms and impairment 
(i.e., ADHD-Persist group).
Demographic characteristics of each group are presented 
in Table 1. Analyses indicated that groups did not differ sig-
nificantly on any demographic characteristic. In addition, 
46.5% of adults in the ADHD-Desist group and 63.0% of 
adults in the ADHD-Persist group reported receiving medi-
cation for ADHD by age 12, and 4.7% of the ADHD-Desist 
group and 29.6% of the ADHD-Persist group were cur-
rently receiving medication for ADHD. When controlling 
for ADHD group status, childhood and current treatment 
histories were not associated with any of the associated 
problems. Thus, neither variable was included as a covari-
ate in our analyses.
Measures
Participants completed the following questionnaires as part 
of a single online survey. Prior to completing this survey, 
participants provided informed consent with a digital 
acknowledgment. This study was approved by the univer-
sity Institutional Review Board.
ADHD status.  To assess for current ADHD symptoms, we 
used the CAARS (CAARS; Conners et  al., 1999a). The 
CAARS is a 66-item self-report inventory of ADHD, appro-
priate for respondents 18 years of age or older and includes 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th 
ed.; DSM-IV; American Psychiatric Association, 1994) 
symptoms of inattention (IA) and hyperactivity/impulsivity 
(HI). Responses are scored on a 4-point scale from 0 (not at 
all) to 3 (very much), with responses of “2” or “3” consid-
ered to be clinically significant. The CAARS has strong 
test–retest reliability (1 month, r = 0.89; Erhardt et al., 1999) 
and internal consistency (α = 0.86–0.92; Conners, et  al., 
1999b). CAARS scores are positively correlated with other 
self-report ADHD measures and show good sensitivity and 
specificity to adult ADHD diagnoses (Erhardt et al., 1999). 
As ADHD symptoms are often exaggerated (e.g., Harrison 
et al., 2007), we used three indices to identify and exclude 
potentially invalid over-reporters: T-scores > 80 and high 
scores on an inconsistency index developed by Conners 
et  al. (1999a), and high scores on an infrequency index 
developed by Suhr et al. (2011). We also excluded workers 
in the control group who did not exceed clinical cutoffs on 
the ASRS-S during screening, but later reported clinically 
significant symptoms of IA or HI on the CAARS. Partici-
pants identified by any one of these four

## References
References
Altszuler, A. R., Page, T. F., Gnagy, E. M., Coxe, S., Arrieta, A., 
Molina, B. S., & Pelham, W. E. (2016). Financial dependence 
of young adults with childhood ADHD. Journal of Abnormal 
Child Psychology, 44(6), 1217–1229.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (1994). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). APA.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2013). Diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). APA.
Amador-Campos, J. A., Gómez...
---
