---
# Brain alterations in children/adolescents with ADHD revisited_ A neuroimaging meta-analysis of 96 structural and functional studies
**Autores**: Fateme Samea
**Año**: 2018
**Journal**: Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 100 (2019) 1-8. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.02.011
**DOI/Link**: ADHD; Activation likelihood estimation; Coordinate-based meta-analysis; fMRI; VBM; 

## Abstract
Not found

## Key Findings
Discussion
The current study provides the largest and most comprehensive
meta-analytic summary of neuroimaging findings in children and ado-
lescents with ADHD across several imaging modalities, following the
current best-practice recommendations (Muller et al., 2018). The
pooled structural and functional assessment and the additional sub-
analyses focusing on homogeneous subsets of experiments (in terms of
modality and direction) yielded no significant convergence across the
available ADHD literature. Reasons of this heterogeneity may be ac-
counted for several issues including clinical heterogeneity and varia-
tions in experimental design and analysis. We discuss further this het-
erogeneity in the next section. Moreover, we also restricted all the
experiments by medication-status, gender, ADHD sub-types, as well as
task-fMRI by specific cognitive domains and stimulus types, and
F. Samea, et al.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 100 (2019) 1–8
3
observed convergence aberrant fin... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
Methods
2.1. Search strategy and selection criteria
Based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (Moher et al., 2009) and current consensus guidelines
for neuroimaging meta-analyses (Muller et al., 2018), we searched
PubMed, OVID (EMBASE, ERIC and Medline), Web of Knowledge, and
Scopus up to June 1,2018 for neuroimaging studies on ADHD using the
following search terms: (ADHD OR attention-deficit hyperactivity dis-
order) AND ("functional magnetic resonance imaging" OR fMRI OR
"voxel-based morphometry" OR VBM) AND (children OR adolescents).
In addition, we identified further papers by reference tracking and
consulting review articles. Next, two authors (FS and SS) independently
screened all the identified abstracts. Case-reports, letters to editors,
reviews, meta-analyses, methodological studies and reports based
on < 10 subjects per group were excluded, as suggested previously
(Muller et al., 2018; Tahmasian et al., 2017, 2016). Furthermore, we
excluded all studies using region of interest (ROI) analysis, as the null
distribution in CBMA reflects a random spatial association between
findings across the entire brain. The assumption that each voxel has a
priori the same chance for being reported, however, is violated by ROI
analyses, creating a sizable bias and inflated significance for the re-
spective regions (Muller et al., 2018, 2017).
Diagnosis of ADHD patients in the included papers had to be based
on DSM-IV-TR, or DSM-5, or ICD-10 criteria. The other criteria include
the mean age < 18 year old, no neurological or psychiatric comorbid-
ities (such as depression, anxiety, autism, learning disorder, and epi-
lepsy) or IQ > 70. We only included the experiments performing a
group comparison between patients with ADHD and healthy controls
(i.e., no within-group contrasts or contrasts of patients with ADHD
versus patients with other disorders). We did not exclude reports on
medicated ADHD patients in order to reflect the fact that these re-
present the bulk of the current literature. However, all included patients
were off-medicated during the image acquisition. As suggested earlier
(Muller et al., 2018, 2017), studies reporting the effects of pharmaco-
logic or psychological treatment were only included in case the authors
reported between-group differences at baseline or main effects of di-
agnosis.
2.2. Organization of coordinates
Extracted data included bibliographic information, age, gender and
number of subjects, imaging modality, subtype and medication status of
patients with ADHD, and the peak coordinates of group comparisons in
Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) (Evans et al., 1993) or Talairach
(Talairach and Tournoux, 1988) space with the latter being subse-
quently transformed into MNI space (Lancaster et al., 2007). Of note, in
neuroimaging meta-analyses, “study” refers to a single scientific pub-
lication, while “experiment” denotes a particular comparison, i.e., a
group comparison contrast yielding a distinct set of coordinates.
Given that the samples of several studies (partially) overlapped,
including such experiments may yield spurious convergence. Thus, we
followed the recommended approach to organize data by subjects ra-
ther than experiments, avoiding undue influence of a patient cohort
(Turkeltaub et al., 2012). Specifically, we combined experiments in the
same direction (in-/decreases) for a given set of patients, yielding a
maximum of two “experiments” per sample consisting of all extracted
coordinates for this set of patients (i.e., one for ADHD > Control
contrast, one for Control > ADHD contrast). Of note, the experiments
were merged regardless of whether separate experiments were reported
in one or different papers, whenever identity of the subjects could be
established (Turkeltaub et al., 2012).
2.3. Activation likelihood estimation
We used the revised version of the Activation Likelihood Estimation
(ALE) algorithm (Eickhoff et al., 2012) to test significant convergence
between activation foci relative to a null-hypothesis of random spatial
association between experiments. Firstly, the reported foci were mod-
eled as center peaks of 3D Gaussian probability distributions re-
presenting the spatial uncertainty associated with these arising from
both sampling effects and methodological differences in data processing
and analysis. Importantly, the modeled uncertainty is scaled by the
number of subjects in the smaller group to accommodate higher un-
certainty of findings from smaller samples. The ensuing per-experiment
“modeled activation” maps were then combined into an ALE map by
computing their union across experiments (Eickhoff et al., 2012;
Turkeltaub et al., 2012). Subsequently, an analytical approach based on
non-linear histogram integration was conducted to test against the null
hypothesis of random spatial association (Eickhoff et al., 2012;
F. Samea, et al.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 100 (2019) 1–8
2
Turkeltaub et al., 2012), followed by cluster-level family-wise error
(cFWE)
correction
at
p < 0.05
(cluster-forming
threshold
of
p < 0·001 on the voxel level) based on Monte-Carlo simulation
(Eickhoff et al., 2017; Muller et al., 2018).
2.4. Performed analyses
We first performed an ALE analysis across all identified experiments
in order to probe for abnormalities independently of direction and
neuroimaging modality. Next, we performed three separate sets of
analyses assessing increases, decreases or aberrations (pooling in-/de-
creases) in structural (VBM) and functional (fMRI) imaging, respec-
tively. As recommended, separate analyses were performed only for
those combinations of direction and modality yielding at least 17 ex-
periments, given consideration on robustness and power (Eickhoff
et al., 2016). Hence, specific analysis of rs-fMRI studies was not possible
due to low number of experiments. Relatedly, we also split the available
experiments by medication status, gender or behavioral subtype ADHD
patients, noting that the number of experiments for female patients as
well as isolated inattentive or hyperactive subtypes was insufficient for
analysis.
Furthermore, we probed for convergence among task-fMRI studies
when focusing only on specific cognitive domains and found a sufficient
number of experiments (> 17) (Eickhoff et al., 2016) for inhibitory
control and attention, but also performed a joint analyses on the re-
maining cognitive tasks (memory, timing, reasoning). Number of ex-
periments on reward processing tasks, were not sufficient to analyze.
Finally, the available studies were also categorized by stimulus type
(emotion, reward, neutral), but only field a sufficient number for a sub-
analysis of neutral stimuli.
Finally, for significant convergent findings, related to subgroups of
experiments e.g., subgroup of all fMRI experiments representing male
only, we checked the number of studies that contributed to the con-
vergent cluster. The question was whether the contribution rate re-
presents the proportion of all related experiments in the database. For
example, if X out of P fMRI experiments with mail only contribute to a
convergent cluster, we evaluated how likely it is that, this contribution
rate represent proportion of P fMRI experiments across all available
experiments in the database. We tested this for each significant finding
separately, using binomial test in SPSS (v22). Wherever the contribu-
tion rate of a subgroup of experiments represents the proportion of their
experiments across all experiments in the database, one could infer that
the convergent finding may be driven by the effects of main indicator
(e.g., male only) of the subgroup.
3. Results
From a pool of 1586 retrieved publications, 205 potentially eligible
studies were identified. Among them, 109 were subsequently excluded
due to the reasons including ROI analyses, no reported contrast be-
tween ADHD and healthy subjects, or longitudinal studies without re-
porting a baseline experiment. In case the study met all the criteria
except reporting the peak coordinates for group comparisons, we con-
tacted the authors to obtain the relevant information. In total, 96 stu-
dies (68 task-fMRI, 6 rs-fMRI, 22 VBM) were finally eligible for the
current meta-analyses (Fig. 1, Supplemental Table S2) reporting a total
of 130 individual experiments (92 task-fMRI, 32 VBM and 6 rs-fMRI;
Supplement) based on 1914 unique subjects. Of these, 62.7% reported
decreases in ADHD patients compared to controls (54 task-fMRI, 25
VBM and 3 rs-fMRI; Supplement).
3.1. Meta-analyses of neuroimaging findings in ADHD
Overall, we conducted several separate ALE meta-analyses. When
pooling
in-/decreases
experiments
(Fig.
2),
the
results
yielded
p = 0.129 (across structural and functional findings), p = 0.452 (for
VBM only), and p = 0.212 (for fMRI, pooling across task and resting
state). Also a restriction to task-fMRI experiments did not provide a
significance finding (p = 0.062). Similarly, restricting meta-analyses to
in-/decreases in ADHD, lead to non-significant findings (decreased: all
p = 0.195, VBM p = 0.341, fMRI p = 0.138, task-fMRI only p = 0.329;
increased:
all
p = 0.175;
fMRI
p = 0.153,
task-fMRI
p = 0.668;
Table 1 A). Of note, repeating all analyses with an alternative, poten-
tially more liberal statistical threshold (i.e., threshold-free cluster en-
hancement, TFCE (Smith and Nichols, 2009)), fully corroborated these
results and likewise reveal non-significant convergence (Table 1 A).
3.2. Follow-up sub-analyses on task fMRI findings
Of the 68 task-fMRI studies, 33% investigated inhibitory control,
29% attention, 25% other cognitive domains and 13% reward proces-
sing (Supplement). With respect to stimulus type, 70% used neutral,
12% emotional and 17% rewarding stimuli (Supplement). Again, no
significant convergence (Table 1B) was found in any of the more re-
stricted and hence specific sub-analyses for which a sufficient number
of experiments was available (inhibitory control p = 0.302, attention
p = 0.847, all other cognitive domains p = 0.520), even though we
noted a trend towards significance when specifically analyzing the
convergence of decreased activity for inhibitory control (p = 0.052).
Repeating all analyses with TFCE threshold, the latter result did pass
statistical significance at p = 0.040 (Table 1B).
We also conducted separate analyses on in-/decreases and their
pooled effect for only those experiments using neutral stimuli and found
significant aberrant convergence in the left pallidum/putamen (local
maximum: -18, 4, -4 in MNI space, 109 voxels, 69.7% left pallidum,
12.7% left putamen) when looking at the pooled in-/decreased acti-
vation experiments in ADHD (p = 0.036), but not for either direction
individually
(decrease
p = 0.244,
increase
p = 0.110
(Fig.
3A,
Table 1C).
Finally, we also repeated all main and follow-up analyses including
only medication-naïve, male or combined-type ADHD patients, re-
spectively, yielding a single (marginally significant) convergence for
decreased fMRI (task-fMRI and rs-fMRI) in male subjects on the left
inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) (local maximum: -38, 26, -16 in MNI space,
93 voxels, 83% in frontal orbital cortex) (p = 0.049, Fig. 3B, Supple-
ment). Moreover, we used binomial test on the contribution-rate (i.e.,
13% (4 out of 30 decreased fMRI experiments with male only and their
main proportion in the database (i.e., 52% (30 out of 57 decreased fMRI
experiments). The result indicated that observed contribution-rate sig-
nificantly is less than the chance probability (observed-prob = 0.13,
test-prob = 0.52, p-value = 0.001). Regarding the left putamen/pal-
lidum cluster, 11 out of 41 task-fMRI experiments with neutral stimuli,
contributed to this convergent finding, while the proportion of task-
fMRI experiments with neutral stimuli in the database was 0.44 (41out
of 92 task-fMRI experiments). The result of binomial test was not sig-
nificant (observed-prob = 0.37, test-prob = 0.44, p-value = 0.268).
4.

## Results
results highlight the need for further high-powered investigations, but may also in-
dicate ADHD pathophysiology might rest in network interactions rather than just regional abnormality.
1. Introduction
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a prevalent
neurodevelopmental condition characterized by age-inappropriate and
impairing inattention and/or impulsiveness-hyperactivity based on
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition
(DSM-5)
and
International
Classification
of
Diseases
(ICD-10)
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013). ADHD is commonly asso-
ciated with school/academic, occupational, and social dysfunction
(Biederman, 2005; Caye et al., 2016). Furthermore, deficit in several
cognitive domains has been demonstrated in individuals with ADHD by
neuropsychological studies (Sonuga-Barke et al., 2010). In addition to
neuropsychological, genetics and neurochemical studies investigating
the pathophysiology of ADHD (Caye et al., 2016), a large number of
neuroimaging studies have been published over the last three decades
to elucidate potential structural or functional alterations of ADHD
(Hoogman et al., 2017; Konrad and Eickhoff, 2010). However, their
findings are often inconsistent or conflicting. Hence, based on these
individual studies, the neural correlates of ADHD remain elusive.
Coordinate based meta-analysis (CBMA) of neuroimaging experi-
ments can overcome this issue by providing a synoptic view of findings
across studies, hereby consolidating the existing literature (Eickhoff
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.02.011
Received 31 August 2018; Received in revised form 21 January 2019; Accepted 16 February 2019
⁎ Corresponding author at: Institute of Medical Science and Technology, Shahid Beheshti University, Daneshjou Boulevard, Velenjak, P.O. Box 1983969411,
Tehran, Iran.
E-mail address: m_tahmasian@sbu.ac.ir (M. Tahmasian).
1 V.N. & M.T. contributed equally to this study.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 100 (2019) 1–8
Available online 18 February 2019
0149-7634/ © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
T
et al., 2012; Turkeltaub et al., 2002). CBMA uses the reported peak
coordinates to identify “if” and “where” the convergence between re-
ported coordinates is higher than expected by chance (Eickhoff et al.,
2012). Previous meta-analyses on neuroimaging studies in ADHD have
focused on structural imaging (Ellison-Wright et al., 2008; Frodl and
Skokauskas, 2012; Nakao et al., 2011; Valera et al., 2007) or task-based
functional imaging only (Cortese et al., 2012; Dickstein et al., 2006;
Hart et al., 2012, 2013; Lei et al., 2015; McCarthy et al., 2014) (Sup-
plemental Table S1). In addition of being outdated, however, they also
yielded inconsistent findings. Meta-analyses of structural imaging stu-
dies suggested regional gray matter volume reductions in various cor-
tical regions and also the basal ganglia and cerebellum, but showed
limited agreement across analyses (Ellison-Wright et al., 2008; Frodl
and Skokauskas, 2012; Nakao et al., 2011; Valera et al., 2007). Like-
wise, meta-analyses of activation studies heterogeneously indicated
aberrations in a wide number of regions covering different cerebral
lobes and systems, as well as the basal ganglia, thalamus and cere-
bellum (Cortese et al., 2012; Dickstein et al., 2006; Hart et al., 2012,
2013; Lei et al., 2015; McCarthy et al., 2014).
Divergence across previous meta-analyses may in part reflects ra-
ther low number of included studies, different in-/exclusion criteria,
(too) liberal statistical thresholding in search for positive findings
(Muller et al., 2018; Tahmasian et al., 2018b). Moreover, heterogeneity
in the examined hypotheses, the assessed clinical populations (e.g.,
subtype or severity of patients), the applied statistical approaches, and
last but not least, different practices in reporting negative findings re-
lated to the included individual studies are important factors too
(Muller et al., 2018; Tahmasian et al., 2018a, 2018b). To address the
heterogeneity and statistical power issues of the previous meta-ana-
lyses, we conducted a large scale structural and functional meta-ana-
lysis, following recently established consensus guidelines for neuroi-
maging meta-analyses suggested by the developers of all major software
packages (Muller et al., 2018). The current meta-analysis is based on
the largest number of original ADHD findings, strict adherence to best-
practice protocols and stringent thresholding. The main aim of the
current study was to find spatially consistent brain abnormalities in
patients with ADHD compared to healthy comparisons. Hence, we
pooled all the structural and functional studies, to provide a compre-
hensive overview of grey matter and functional alterations in ADHD.
This approach has been applied previously to other neuropsychiatric
disorder (Radua et al., 2012; Raschle et al., 2015; Sacher et al., 2012;
Tahmasian et al., 2016, 2018a, 2018b; Zakzanis et al., 2003). More-
over, with regard to heterogeneity issues, we conducted several sub-
analyses, clustered by extracted factors representing potential hetero-
geneity sources (i.e., modality, medication status, gender or behavioral
subtype ADHD patients as well as specific cognitive domains and sti-
muli type of the tasks used in task-fMRI studies). By revisiting the issue
of neuroimaging findings in ADHD, we thus aim to settle the ongoing
dispute on the presence and localization of structural and/or functional
brain alterations in children and adolescents with ADHD.
2.

## Clinical Significance
Conclusion
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the largest meta-analysis
of structural and functional neuroimaging experiments in children/
adolescents with ADHD. We found no significant convergent across
structural and functional regional alterations in ADHD, which might be
attributable to clinical heterogeneity, experimental and analytical
flexibility and positive publication bias, but could also point towards a
more distributed, network-based pathology lacking a consistent ex-
pression at any particular location. Among many different sub-analyses,
we only observed the convergence dysfunction for task-fMRI experi-
ments (using neutral stimuli) in the left pallidum/putamen and de-
creased activity (using male subjects) in the left IFG. This study high-
lights the need for further exploration assessing regional structural and
functional maladaptation, as well as connectivity in parallel to unravel
the relation between abnormal regional effects and disturbed integra-
tion in ADHD.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as
a potential conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This study is supported by Shahid Beheshti University. Author SBE
is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG (EI 816/11-
1), the National Institute of Mental Health (R01-MH074457), the
Helmholtz Portfolio Theme "Supercomputing and Modeling for the
Human Brain" and the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and
Innovation Programme under Grant Agreement No. 785907 (HBP
SGA2).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the
online version, at doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.02.
011.
References
American Psychiatric Association, 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 5th ed. Washington, DC.
Arnsten, A.F., Rubia, K., 2012. Neurobiological circuits regulating attention, cognitive
control, motivation, and emotion: disruptions in neurodevelopmental psychiatric
disorders. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 51, 356–367.
Bernfeld, J., 2012. ADHD and factor analysis: are there really three distinct subtypes of
ADHD? Appl. Neuropsychol. Child 1, 100–104.
Biederman, J., 2005. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a selective overview. Biol.
Psychiatry 57, 1215–1220.
Castellanos, F.X., Proal, E., 2012. Large-scale brain systems in ADHD: beyond the pre-
frontal-striatal model. Trends Cogn. Sci. (Regul. Ed.) 16, 17–26.
Caye, A., Rocha, T.B., Anselmi, L., Murray, J., Menezes, A.M., Barros, F.C., Goncalves, H.,
Wehrmeister, F., Jensen, C.M., Steinhausen, H.C., Swanson, J.M., Kieling, C., Rohde,
L.A., 2016. Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity disorder trajectories from childhood to
young adulthood: evidence from a birth cohort supporting a late-onset syndrome.
JAMA Psychiatry 73, 705–712.
Cortese, S., Kelly, C., Chabernaud, C., Proal, E., Di Martino, A., Milham, M.P., Castellanos,
F.X., 2012. Toward systems neuroscience of ADHD: a meta-analysis of 55 fMRI stu-
dies. Am. J. Psychiatry 169, 1038–1055.
Cortese, S., Castellanos, F.X., Eickhoff, C.R., D’Acunto, G., Masi, G., Fox, P.T., Laird, A.R.,
Eickhoff, S.B., 2016. Functional decoding and meta-analytic connectivity modeling in
adult Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 80, 896–904.
Dickstein, S.G., Bannon, K., Castellanos, F.X., Milham, M.P., 2006. The neural correlates
of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: an ALE meta-analysis. J. Child Psychol.
Psychiatry 47, 1051–1062.
Eickhoff, S.B., Bzdok, D., Laird, A.R., Kurth, F., Fox, P.T., 2012. Activation likelihood
estimation meta-analysis revisited. Neuroimage 59, 2349–2361.
Eickhoff, S.B., Nichols, T.E., Laird, A.R., Hoffstaedter, F., Amunts, K., Fox, P.T., Bzdok, D.,
Eickhoff, C.R., 2016. Behavior, sensitivity, and power of activation likelihood esti-
mation characterized by massive empirical simulation. Neuroimage 137, 70–85.
Eickhoff, S.B., Laird, A.R., Fox, P.M., Lancaster, J.L., Fox, P.T., 2017. Implementation
errors in the GingerALE software: description and recommendations. Hum. Brain
Mapp. 38, 7–11.
Elia, J., Ambrosini, P., Berrettini, W., 2008. ADHD characteristics: I. Concurrent co-
morbidity patterns in children & adolescents. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry Ment. Health
2, 15.
Ellison-Wright, I., Ellison-Wright, Z., Bullmore, E., 2008. Structural brain change in
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder identified by meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry
Fig. 3. Convergent findings of sub-analyses. A.
Aberrant activity (green) in the left pallidum/
putamen
(-18,
4,
-4
MNI,
109
voxels,
p = 0.036), based on task-based fMRI experi-
ments
(using
neutral
stimuli
only);
B.
Decreased activity (blue) in the left inferior
frontal gyrus (-38, 26, -16 MNI, 93 voxels,
p = 0.049 based on fMRI (task-fMRI & rs-fMRI)
experiments (using male patients only).
F. Samea, et al.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 100 (2019) 1–8
7
8, 51.
Evans, A.C., D.L.C, Mills, S.R., Brown, E.D., Kelly, R.L., Peters, T.M., 1993. 3D statistical
neuroanatomical models from 305 MRI volumes. Nuclear Science Symposium and
Medical Imaging Conference 1813–1817.
Frodl, T., Skokauskas, N., 2012. Meta-analysis of structural MRI studies in children and
adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder indicates treatment effects. Acta
Psychiatr. Scand. 125, 114–126.
Goodkind, M., Eickhoff, S.B., Oathes, D.J., Jiang, Y., Chang, A., Jones-Hagata, L.B.,
Ortega, B.N., Zaiko, Y.V., Roach, E.L., Korgaonkar, M.S., Grieve, S.M., Galatzer-Levy,
I., Fox, P.T., Etkin, A., 2015. Identification of a common neurobiological substrate for
mental illness. JAMA Psychiatry 72, 305–315.
Hart, H., Radua, J., Mataix-Cols, D., Rubia, K., 2012. Meta-analysis of fMRI studies of
timing in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.
36, 2248–2256.
Hart, H., Radua, J., Nakao, T., Mataix-Cols, D., Rubia, K., 2013. Meta-analysis of func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging studies of inhibition and attention in attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder: exploring task-specific, stimulant medication, and age
effects. JAMA Psychiatry 70, 185–198.
Herz, D.M., Eickhoff, S.B., Lokkegaard, A., Siebner, H.R., 2014. Functional neuroimaging
of motor control in Parkinson’s disease: a meta-analysis. Hum. Brain Mapp. 35,
3227–3237.
Hoogman, M., Bralten, J., Hibar, D.P., Mennes, M., Zwiers, M.P., Schweren, L.S.J., van
Hulzen, K.J.E., Medland, S.E., Shumskaya, E., Jahanshad, N., Zeeuw, P., Szekely, E.,
Sudre, G., Wolfers, T., Onnink, A.M.H., Dammers, J.T., Mostert, J.C., Vives-Gilabert,
Y., Kohls, G., Oberwelland, E., Seitz, J., Schulte-Ruther, M., Ambrosino, S., Doyle,
A.E., Hovik, M.F., Dramsdahl, M., Tamm, L., van Erp, T.G.M., Dale, A., Schork, A.,
Conzelmann, A., Zierhut, K., Baur, R., McCarthy, H., Yoncheva, Y.N., Cubillo, A.,
Chantiluke, K., Mehta, M.A., Paloyelis, Y., Hohmann, S., Baumeister, S., Bramati, I.,
Mattos, P., Tovar-Moll, F., Douglas, P., Banaschewski, T., Brandeis, D., Kuntsi, J.,
Asherson, P., Rubia, K., Kelly, C., Martino, A.D., Milham, M.P., Castellanos, F.X.,
Frodl, T., Zentis, M., Lesch, K.P., Reif, A., Pauli, P., Jernigan, T.L., Haavik, J., Plessen,
K.J., Lundervold, A.J., Hugdahl, K., Seidman, L.J., Biederman, J., Rommelse, N.,
Heslenfeld, D.J., Hartman, C.A., Hoekstra, P.J., Oosterlaan, J., Polier, G.V., Konrad,
K., Vilarroya, O., Ramos-Quiroga, J.A., Soliva, J.C., Durston, S., Buitelaar, J.K.,
Faraone, S.V., Shaw, P., Thompson, P.M., Franke, B., 2017. Subcortical brain volume
differences in participants with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children
and adults: a cross-sectional mega-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry 4, 310–319.
Itami, S., Uno, H., 2002. Orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in attention-deficit hyper-
activity disorder revealed by reversal and extinction tasks. Neuroreport 13,
2453–2457.
Konrad, K., Eickhoff, S.B., 2010. Is the ADHD brain wired differently? A review on
structural and functional connectivity in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.
Hum. Brain Mapp. 31, 904–916.
Lancaster, J.L., Tordesillas-Gutierrez, D., Martinez, M., Salinas, F., Evans, A., ZilleS, K.,
Mazziotta, J.C., Fox, P.T., 2007. Bias between MNI and talairach coordinates ana-
lyzed using the ICBM-152 brain template. Hum. Brain Mapp. 28, 1194–1205.
Lancet Psychiatry, 2017. Subcortical Brain Volume Differences in Participants with
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adults: A Cross-Sectional
Mega-Analysis 4. pp. 310–319. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30049-4.
Epub 2017 Feb 16.
Lei, D., Du, M., Wu, M., Chen, T., Huang, X., Du, X., Bi, F., Kemp, G.J., Gong, Q., 2015.
Functional MRI reveals different response inhibition between adults and children
with ADHD. Neuropsychology 29, 874–881.
Max, J.E., Fox, P.T., Lancaster, J.L., Kochunov, P., Mathews, K., Manes, F.F., Robertson,
B.A., Arndt, S., Robin, D.A., Lansing, A.E., 2002. Putamen lesions and the develop-
ment of attention-deficit/hyperactivity symptomatology. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc.
Psychiatry 41, 563–571.
McCarthy, H., Skokauskas, N., Frodl, T., 2014. Identifying a consistent pattern of neural
function in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a meta-analysis. Psychol. Med.
44, 869–880.
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D.G., Group, P., 2009. Preferred reporting
items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. PLoS Med. 6,
e1000097.
Muller, V.I., Cieslik, E.C., Serbanescu, I., Laird, A.R., Fox, P.T., Eickhoff, S.B., 2017.
Altered brain activity in unipolar depression revisited: meta-analyses of neuroima-
ging studies. JAMA Psychiatry 74, 47–55.
Muller, V.I., Cieslik, E.C., Laird, A.R., Fox, P.T., Radua, J., Mataix-Cols, D., Tench, C.R.,
Yarkoni, T., Nichols, T.E., Turkeltaub, P.E., Wager, T.D., Eickhoff, S.B., 2018. Ten
simple rules for neuroimaging meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 84, 151–161.
Nakao, T., Radua, J., Rubia, K., Mataix-Cols, D., 2011. Gray matter volume abnormalities
in ADHD: voxel-based meta-analysis exploring the effects of age and stimulant
medication. Am. J. Psychiatry 168, 1154–1163.
Radua, J., Borgwardt, S., Crescini, A., Mataix-Cols, D., Meyer-Lindenberg, A., McGuire,
P.K., Fusar-Poli, P., 2012. Multimodal meta-analysis of structural and functional
brain changes in first episode psychosis and the effects of antipsychotic medication.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 36, 2325–2333.
Raschle, N.M., Menks, W.M., Fehlbaum, L.V., Tshomba, E., Stadler, C., 2015. Structural
and functional alterations in right dorsomedial prefrontal and left insular cortex Co-
localize in adolescents with aggressive behaviour: an ALE meta-analysis. PLoS One
10, e0136553.
Rubia, K., 2011. Cool" inferior frontostriatal dysfunction in attention-deficit/hyper-
activity disorder versus "hot" ventromedial orbitofrontal-limbic dysfunction in con-
duct disorder: a review. Biol. Psychiatry 69, e69–87.
Sacher, J., Neumann, J., Funfstuck, T., Soliman, A., Villringer, A., Schroeter, M.L., 2012.
Mapping the depressed brain: a meta-analysis of structural and functional alterations
in major depressive disorder. J. Affect. Disord. 140, 142–148.
Smith, S.M., Nichols, T.E., 2009. Threshold-free cluster enhancement: addressing pro-
blems of smoothing, threshold dependence and localisation in cluster inference.
Neuroimage 44, 83–98.
Sonuga-Barke, E., Bitsakou, P., Thompson, M., 2010. Beyond the dual pathway model:
evidence for the dissociation of timing, inhibitory, and delay-related impairments in
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 49,
345–355.
Stevens, M.C., Pearlson, G.D., Calhoun, V.D., Bessette, K.L., 2018. Functional neuroima-
ging evidence for distinct neurobiological pathways in Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 3, 675–685.
Tahmasian, M., Rosenzweig, I., Eickhoff, S.B., Sepehry, A.A., Laird, A.R., Fox, P.T.,
Morrell, M.J., Khazaie, H., Eickhoff, C.R., 2016. Structural and functional neural
adaptations in obstructive sleep apnea: an activation likelihood estimation meta-
analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.
Tahmasian, M., Eickhoff, S.B., Giehl, K., Schwartz, F., Herz, D.M., Drzezga, A., van
Eimeren, T., Laird, A.R., Fox, P.T., Khazaie, H., Zarei, M., Eggers, C., Eickhoff, C.R.,
2017. Resting-state functional reorganization in Parkinson’s disease: an activation
likelihood estimation meta-analysis. Cortex 92, 119–138.
Tahmasian, M., Noori, K., Samea, F., Zarei, M., Spiegelhalder, K., Eickhoff, S.B., van
Someren, E., Khazaie, H., Eickhoff, C.R., 2018a. A Lack of consistent brain alterations
in insomnia disorder: an activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis. Sleep Med.
Rev.
Tahmasian, M., Noori, K., Samea, F., Zarei, M., Spiegelhalder, K., Eickhoff, S.B., Van
Someren, E., Khazaie, H., Eickhoff, C.R., 2018b. Reply to Hua Liu, HaiCun Shi and
PingLei Pan: coordinate based meta-analyses in a medium sized literature: con-
siderations, limitations and road ahead. Sleep Med. Rev.
Talairach, J., Tournoux, P., 1988. Co-planar Stereotaxic Atlas of the Human Brain: 3-
dimensional Proportional System: an Approach to Cerebral Imaging. Georg Thieme,
Stuttgart; New York.
Turkeltaub, P.E., Eden, G.F., Jones, K.M., Zeffiro, T.A., 2002. Meta-analysis of the func-
tional neuroanatomy of single-word reading: method and validation. Neuroimage 16,
765–780.
Turkeltaub, P.E., Eickhoff, S.B., Laird, A.R., Fox, M., Wiener, M., Fox, P., 2012.
Minimizing within-experiment and within-group effects in Activation Likelihood
Estimation meta-analyses. Hum. Brain Mapp. 33, 1–13.
Valera, E.M., Faraone, S.V., Murray, K.E., Seidman, L.J., 2007. Meta-analysis of structural
imaging findings in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 61,
1361–1369.
Wahlstedt, C., Thorell, L.B., Bohlin, G., 2009. Heterogeneity in ADHD: neuropsycholo-
gical pathways, comorbidity and symptom domains. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol. 37,
551–564.
Wegbreit, E., Cushman, G.K., Puzia, M.E., Weissman, A.B., Kim, K.L., Laird, A.R.,
Dickstein, D.P., 2014. Developmental meta-analyses of the functional neural corre-
lates of bipolar disorder. JAMA Psychiatry 71, 926–935.
Zakzanis, K.K., Graham, S.J., Campbell, Z., 2003. A meta-analysis of structural and
functional brain imaging in dementia of the Alzheimer’s type: a neuroimaging profile.
Neuropsychol. Rev. 13, 1–18.
F. Samea, et al.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 100 (2019) 1–8
8

## References
references up to June 2018. Then,
we extracted the reported coordinates reflecting group comparison between ADHD and healthy subjects from 96
eligible studies, containing 1914 unique participants. The analysis of pooled structural and functional, sub-
analyses restricted to modality, and in-/decreased contrast did not yield any significant findings. However,
further sub-analyses in the task-fMRI experiments (neutral stimuli only) led to aberrant activity in the left
pallidum/putamen and decrease...
---
