---
# AJP13070966 276..293
**Autores**: Not specified
**Año**: 2014
**Journal**: Scientific Paper
**DOI/Link**: N/A

## Abstract
Abstract reward and punishment representations in the hu-
man orbitofrontal cortex. Nat Neurosci 2001; 4:95–102
106. Overmeyer S, Bullmore ET, Suckling J, Simmons A, Williams SC,
Santosh PJ, Taylor E: Distributed grey and white matter deﬁcits
in hyperkinetic disorder: MRI evidence for anatomical abnor-
mality in an attentional network. Psychol Med 2001; 31:
1425–1435
107. Knutson B, Adams CM, Fong GW, Hommer D: Anticipation of
increasing monetary reward selectively recruits nucleus ac-
cumbens. J Neurosci 2001; 21:RC159
108. Tomasi D, Volkow ND: Abnormal functional connectivity in
children with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psy-
chiatry 2012; 71:443–450
109. Costa Dias TG, Wilson VB, Bathula DR, Iyer SP, Mills KL, Thurlow
BL, Stevens CA, Musser ED, Carpenter SD, Grayson DS, Mitchell
SH, Nigg JT, Fair DA: Reward circuit connectivity relates to delay
discounting in children with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity dis-
order. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2012; 23:33–45
110. Castellanos FX, Proal E: Large-scale brain systems in ADHD:
beyond the prefrontal-striatal model. Trends Cogn Sci 2012;
16:17–26
111. Surman CB, Biederman J, Spencer T, Yorks D, Miller CA, Petty
CR, Faraone SV: Deﬁcient emotional self-regulation and adult
attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder: a family risk analysis.
Am J Psychiatry 2011; 168:617–623
112. Biederman J, Spencer T, Lomedico A, Day H, Petty CR, Faraone
SV: Deﬁcient emotional self-regulation and pediatric attention
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder: a family risk analysis. Psychol
Med 2012; 42:639–646
113. Hudziak JJ, Althoff RR, Derks EM, Faraone SV, Boomsma DI:
Prevalence and genetic architecture of Child Behavior Checklist-
juvenile bipolar disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2005; 58:562–568
114. Mick E, McGough J, Loo S, Doyle AE, Wozniak J, Wilens TE,
Smalley S, McCracken J, Biederman J, Faraone SV: Genome-
wide association study of the Child Behavior Checklist dysreg-
ulation proﬁle. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2011; 50:
807–817.e8
115. Taylor E: Developmental neuropsychopathology of attention
deﬁcit and impulsiveness. Dev Psychopathol 1999; 11:607–628
116. Peris TS, Baker BL: Applications of the expressed emotion
construct to young children with externalizing behavior:
stability and prediction over time. J Child Psychol Psychiatry
2000; 41:457–462
117. Childress AC, Arnold V, Adeyi B, Dirks B, Babcock T, Scheckner
B, Lasser R, Lopez FA: The effects of lisdexamfetamine
dimesylate on emotional lability in children 6 to 12 years of
age with ADHD in a double-blind placebo-controlled trial.
J Atten Disord (Epub ahead of print, June 26, 2012)
118. Ahmann PA, Waltonen SJ, Olson KA, Theye FW, Van Erem AJ,
LaPlant RJ: Placebo-controlled evaluation of Ritalin side effects.
Pediatrics 1993; 91:1101–1106
119. Gillberg C, Melander H, von Knorring AL, Janols LO, Thernlund
G, Hägglöf B, Eidevall-Wallin L, Gustafsson P, Kopp S: Long-
term stimulant treatment of children with attention-deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder symptoms: a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1997; 54:
857–864
120. Kratochvil CJ, Faries D, Vaughan B, Perwien A, Busner J, Saylor
K, Kaplan S, Buermeyer C, Swindle R: Emotional expression
during
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorders
treatment:
initial assessment of treatment effects. J Child Adolesc Psy-
chopharmacol 2007; 17:51–62
121. Coghill DR, Rhodes SM, Matthews K: The neuropsychological
effects of chronic methylphenidate on drug-naive boys with
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2007;
62:954–962
122. Herbert S, Harvey E, Roberts J, Wichowski K, Lugo-Candelas CI:
A randomized controlled trial of a parent training and emotion
socialization program for families of hyperactive preschool-aged
children. Behav Ther 2013; 44:302–316
123. Webster-Stratton CH, Reid MJ, Beauchaine T: Combining par-
ent and child training for young children with ADHD. J Clin
Child Adolesc Psychol 2011; 40:191–203
124. Marchant BK, Reimherr FW, Robison RJ, Olsen JL, Kondo DG:
Methylphenidate transdermal system in adult ADHD and im-
pact on emotional and oppositional symptoms. J Atten Disord
2011; 15:295–304
125. Rösler M, Retz W, Fischer R, Ose C, Alm B, Deckert J, Philipsen
A, Herpertz S, Ammer R: Twenty-four-week treatment with
extended release methylphenidate improves emotional
symptoms in adult ADHD. World J Biol Psychiatry 2010; 11:
709–718
126. Emilsson B, Gudjonsson G, Sigurdsson JF, Baldursson G,
Einarsson E, Olafsdottir H, Young S: Cognitive behaviour ther-
apy in medication-treated adults with ADHD and persistent
symptoms: a randomized controlled trial. BMC Psychiatry
2011; 11:116
127. Manos MJ, Brams M, Childress AC, Findling RL, López FA, Jensen
PS: Changes in emotions related to medication used to treat
ADHD, part I: literature review. J Atten Disord 2011; 15:101–112
128. Dickstein DP, Towbin KE, Van Der Veen JW, Rich BA, Brotman
MA, Knopf L, Onelio L, Pine DS, Leibenluft E: Randomized
double-blind placebo-controlled trial of lithium in youths with
severe mood dysregulation. J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol
2009; 19:61–73
129. Donovan SJ, Stewart JW, Nunes EV, Quitkin FM, Parides M,
Daniel W, Susser E, Klein DF: Divalproex treatment for youth
with explosive temper and mood lability: a double-blind,
placebo-controlled crossover design. Am J Psychiatry 2000;
157:818–820
130. Blader JC, Schooler NR, Jensen PS, Pliszka SR, Kafantaris V:
Adjunctive divalproex versus placebo for children with ADHD
and aggression refractory to stimulant monotherapy. Am J
Psychiatry 2009; 166:1392–1401
131. Sonuga-Barke EJ, Brandeis D, Cortese S, Daley D, Ferrin M,
Holtmann M, Stevenson J, Danckaerts M, van der Oord S,
Döpfner M, Dittmann RW, Simonoff E, Zuddas A, Banaschewski
T, Buitelaar J, Coghill D, Hollis C, Konofal E, Lecendreux M, Wong
292
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
EMOTION DYSREGULATION IN ADHD
IC, Sergeant J; European ADHD Guidelines Group: Nonphar-
macological interventions for ADHD: systematic review and
meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials of dietary and
psychological treatments. Am J Psychiatry 2013; 170:275–289
132. Mongia M, Hechtman L: Cognitive behavior therapy for adults
with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: a review of re-
cent randomized controlled trials. Curr Psychiatry Rep 2012;
14:561–567
133. Jensen PS, Hinshaw SP, Kraemer HC, Lenora N, Newcorn JH,
Abikoff HB, March JS, Arnold LE, Cantwell DP, Conners CK,
Elliott GR, Greenhill LL, Hechtman L, Hoza B, Pelham WE, Severe
JB, Swanson JM, Wells KC, Wigal T, Vitiello B: ADHD comorbidity
ﬁndings from the MTA study: comparing comorbid subgroups.
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2001; 40:147–158
134. Daviss WB: A review of co-morbid depression in pediatric ADHD:
etiology, phenomenology, and treatment. J Child Adolesc Psy-
chopharmacol 2008; 18:565–571
135. Barkley RA, Murphy KR: Deﬁcient emotional self-regulation in
children and adults with attention deﬁcit/hhyepractivity dis-
order. Journal of ADHD and Related Disorders 2010; 1:5–29
136. Konrad K, Eickhoff SB: Is the ADHD brain wired differently? A
review on structural and functional connectivity in attention
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. Hum Brain Mapp 2010; 31:
904–916
137. Killingsworth MA, Gilbert DT: A wandering mind is an unhappy
mind. Science 2010; 330:932
138. Shaw P, Malek M, Watson B, Sharp W, Evans A, Greenstein D:
Development of cortical surface area and gyriﬁcation in
attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Biol Psychiatry 2012;
72:191–197
139. Cools R, Roberts AC, Robbins TW: Serotoninergic regulation of
emotional and behavioural control processes. Trends Cogn Sci
2008; 12:31–40
140. Connor D, Findling R, Kollins S, Sallee F, López F, Lyne A,
Tremblay G: Effects of guanfacine extended release on opposi-
tional symptoms in children aged 6–12 years with attention-deﬁcit
hyperactivity disorder and oppositional symptoms: a random-
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. CNS Drugs 2010; 24:
755–768
141. Schulz KP, Clerkin SM, Fan J, Halperin JM, Newcorn JH: Guan-
facine modulates the inﬂuence of emotional cues on prefrontal
cortex activation for cognitive control. Psychopharmacology
(Berl) 2013; 226:261–271
142. Arnold VK, Feifel D, Earl CQ, Yang R, Adler LA: A 9-week, ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group,
dose-ﬁnding study to evaluate the efﬁcacy and safety of
modaﬁnil as treatment for adults with ADHD. J Atten Disord
(Epub ahead of print, May 22, 2012)
143. Rasetti R, Mattay VS, Stankevich B, Skjei K, Blasi G, Sambataro
F, Arrillaga-Romany IC, Goldberg TE, Callicott JH, Apud JA,
Weinberger DR: Modulatory effects of modaﬁnil on neural circuits
regulating emotion and cognition. Neuropsychopharmacology
2010; 35:2101–2109
144. Gow RV, Sumich A, Vallee-Tourangeau F, Crawford MA,
Ghebremeskel K, Bueno AA, Hibbeln JR, Taylor E, Wilson DA,
Rubia K: Omega-3 fatty acids are related to abnormal emotion
processing in adolescent boys with attention deﬁcit hyperac-
tivity disorder. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids 2013;
88:419–429
145. O’Neill S, Rajendran K, Halperin JM: More than child’s play: the
potential beneﬁts of play-based interventions for young chil-
dren with ADHD. Expert Rev 2012; 12:1165–1167
146. Tamm L, Nakonezny PA, Hughes CW: An open trial of a meta-
cognitive executive function training for young children with
ADHD. J Atten Disord (Epub ahead of print, May 29, 2012)
147. Mikami AY, Griggs MS, Lerner MD, Emeh CC, Reuland MM, Jack
A, Anthony MR: A randomized trial of a classroom intervention
to increase peers’ social inclusion of children with attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. J Consult Clin Psychol 2013; 81:
100–112
148. Still GF: Some abnormal psychical conditions in children: the
Goulstonian lectures. Lancet 1902; 1:1008–1011
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
293
SHAW, STRINGARIS, NIGG, ET AL.

## Key Findings
discussion 419–468
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
291
SHAW, STRINGARIS, NIGG, ET AL.
97. Sonuga-Barke EJ, Dalen L, Remington B: Do executive deﬁcits
and delay aversion make independent contributions to pre-
school attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms?
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2003; 42:1335–1342
98. Eisenberg N, Spinrad TL: Emotion-related regulation: sharp-
ening the deﬁnition. Child Dev 2004; 75:334–339
99. Haber SN, Knutson B: The reward circuit: linking primate
anatomy and human imaging. Neuropsychopharmacology
2010; 35:4–26
100. Musser ED, Galloway-Long HS, Frick PJ, Nigg JT: Emotion reg-
ulation and heterogeneity in attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity
disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2013; 52:163–171.e2
101. Gross JJ: The emerging ﬁeld of emotion regulation: an in-
tegrative review. Rev Gen Psychol 1998; 2:271
102. Walcott CM, Landau S: The relation between disinhibition and
emotion regulation in boys with attention deﬁcit h... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
methods. Three key ﬁndings
emerge. First, emotion dysregulation is
prevalent in ADHD throughout the lifespan
and is a major contributor to impairment.
Second, emotion dysregulation in ADHD
may arise from deﬁcits in orienting toward,
recognizing, and/or allocating attention to
emotional stimuli; these deﬁcits implicate
dysfunction within a striato-amygdalo-medial
prefrontal cortical network. Third, while
current treatments for ADHD often also
ameliorate emotion dysregulation, a fo-
cus on this combination of symptoms
reframes
clinical
questions
and
could
stimulate novel therapeutic approaches.
The authors then consider three models
to explain the overlap between emotion
dysregulation and ADHD: emotion dysre-
gulation and ADHD are correlated but
distinct dimensions; emotion dysregula-
tion is a core diagnostic feature of ADHD;
and the combination constitutes a noso-
logical entity distinct from both ADHD and
emotion dysregulation alone. The differing
predictions from each model can guide
research on the much-neglected popula-
tion of patients with ADHD and emotion
dysregulation.
(Am J Psychiatry 2014; 171:276–293)
It has long been recognized that emotion dysregulation
is common in individuals with neurodevelopmental
disorders, including attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disor-
der (ADHD). Indeed, in the early conceptualization of
ADHD as reﬂecting “minimal brain damage,” emotion
dysregulation was placed along with inattention among
the cardinal symptoms (1). Only with the publication of
DSM-III did emotional symptoms became an “associated
feature” rather than a diagnostic criterion of ADHD.
Renewed interest in this area makes timely a review of the
overlap of emotion dysregulation with ADHD, focusing on
prevalence, pathophysiology, and treatment.
In line with previous theorists, we deﬁne emotion reg-
ulation as an individual’s ability to modify an emotional
state so as to promote adaptive, goal-oriented behaviors
(2). It encompasses the processes that allow the individual
to select, attend to, and appraise emotionally arousing stim-
uli, and to do so ﬂexibly. These processes trigger behavioral
and physiological responses that can be modulated in line
with goals. Emotion dysregulation arises when these adap-
tive processes are impaired, leading to behavior that defeats
the individual’s interests. It encompasses 1) emotional ex-
pressions and experiences that are excessive in relation
to social norms and are context inappropriate; 2) rapid,
poorly controlled shifts in emotion (lability); and 3) the
anomalous allocation of attention to emotional stimuli.
Here, we focus on the clinical expression of emotion dys-
regulation as irritability, which is often linked with re-
active aggression and temper outbursts (3–5).
Emotion dysregulation is a dimensional trait that is not
unique to ADHD; rather, it undercuts the traditional divide
between internalizing and externalizing diagnoses and,
indeed, may partly explain their high correlation (6). For
example, a study that contrasted 105 irritable, emotionally
dysregulated children with ADHD and 395 nonirritable
children with ADHD found higher rates not only of
oppositional deﬁant disorder but also of depression
and dysthymia in the group with irritability (7).
Emotion dysregulation is also not synonymous with any
single DSM-5 disorder. For example, of the three symptom
clusters in oppositional deﬁant disorder—angry/irritable
mood, deﬁant behavior, and vindictiveness—only the ﬁrst
plausibly reﬂects dysregulated emotions (8). In its extreme
form, emotion dysregulation is likely to emerge as a major
etiological factor behind the frequent, severe temper out-
bursts and irritability of the new DSM-5 diagnosis of dis-
ruptive mood dysregulation disorder. However, emotion
dysregulation is a dimensional entity, not a categorical
diagnosis, and here we consider the full spectrum of emotion
dysregulation within ADHD, not just extremes. Thus, we
This article is featured in this month’s AJP Audio
276
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
include individuals with emotion dysregulation who do
not meet criteria for any DSM diagnoses beyond ADHD.
We focus on emotion dysregulation itself, rather than on
diagnoses that may include emotion dysregulation and be
comorbid with ADHD, because it is a simpler symptom
construct that is familiar to clinicians and, consistent with
the Research Domain Criteria initiative, may be more
readily tied to underlying neurobiological mechanisms.
Method
We conducted a literature search for relevant articles published
before January 1, 2013 (details of the search are available in the data
supplement that accompanies the online edition of this article). We
summarized data quantitatively where possible. Meta-analyses were
possible for studies of aggressive behavior (9–20), emotion recogni-
tion (12, 21–36), and delay aversion/reward valuation (35, 37–50). As
all the outcomes included in the meta-analysis were continuous, we
calculated standardized mean differences. We used a random-
effects model to generate a pooled effect size and conﬁdence
intervals with the inverse variance method. The remaining studies
are reviewed qualitatively under the headings of prevalence,
pathophysiology, and treatment.

## Results
Results
Prevalence
Childhood. Most epidemiological research has focused on
children and has found a strong association between ADHD
and emotion dysregulation (35, 51–56) (Table 1). A popula-
tion study of 5,326 youths (51) found mood lability in 38% of
children with ADHD, ten times the population rate. Elevated
rates were observed in children without comorbid ADHD,
and similar rates were seen in children with noncomorbid
oppositional deﬁant disorder. Research on the Child Be-
havior Checklist “dysregulation proﬁle” based on parent-
reported problems with mood and aggression in youths
who also have attention problems shows community rates
of 1%25%, compatible with high rates of emotion dysregu-
lation among those likely to have ADHD (62). Clinic-based
studies in youths with ADHD similarly report prevalence
estimates of emotion dysregulation between 24% and 50%.
Reactive aggression may reﬂect emotion dysregulation
(5). Our meta-analysis found consistent elevation in mea-
sures of aggressive behavior in ADHD compared with non-
ADHD populations, associated with a large effect size
(1.92, 95% CI=0.95–2.89) (Figure 1A). In the general pop-
ulation, the correlation is higher between aggression and
hyperactivity-impulsivity (0.60–0.83) than between aggres-
sion and inattention (0.20–0.56) (6). In clinical popula-
tions, emotion dysregulation is commonly associated with
either symptom domain (52, 56).
Notably, behaviors reﬂecting emotion dysregulation
can be reliably provoked among those with ADHD using
paradigms that induce frustration (see Table S1 in the
online data supplement). Children with ADHD show more
negative affect and temper outbursts than do comparison
subjects during challenging tasks. This consistency among
studies is also notable, as different paradigms and behav-
ioral measures were employed.
Infancy and early childhood. Modest correlations (0.10–0.37)
are reported between difﬁcult infantile temperamental
characteristics, such as being fussy, angry, or difﬁcult
to control, and ADHD arising later in childhood (63–67)
(Figure 2; see also Table S2 in the online data supplement).
A longitudinal study of 7,140 children found that while
temperamental emotionality at age 3 predicted comorbid
ADHD and internalizing disorders at age 7, activity level
predicted comorbid ADHD and oppositional deﬁant dis-
order (68). A second longitudinal study found that infants
who developed hyperactive symptoms alone did not differ
temperamentally from typical infants, whereas those who
ultimately developed both ADHD and aggressive symptoms
were uncooperative and irritable from infancy onward (69).
In short, a difﬁcult early temperament with prominent
negative emotionality is modestly linked with later ADHD
combined with emotion dysregulation.
Longitudinal studies. Most studies following children with
ADHD into adulthood have focused on DSM-IV diag-
noses, without considering emotion dysregulation per se,
and have found elevated rates of adult disruptive and
antisocial disorders and, less consistently, mood and
anxiety disorders (70). One study deﬁned emotion dys-
regulation as a moderate elevation (one to two standard
deviations above the mean) on the combined Child Be-
havior Checklist subscales for attention problems, ag-
gressive behavior, and anxious/depressed (71). In that
study, such emotion dysregulation in 79 children with
ADHD was associated 4 years later with more psychiatric
comorbidities, greater social impairment, and ADHD per-
sistence, compared with 98 children with ADHD without
emotion dysregulation and 204 children without ADHD. A
population-based study of 2,076 children (72) found that
those matching the Child Behavior Checklist dysregula-
tion proﬁle had higher rates of anxiety disorders and dis-
ruptive behavior disorders in adulthood compared with
those who did not match the dysregulation proﬁle (72).
Adult studies. Earlier concepts of adult ADHD included
emotion dysregulation as a deﬁning feature (73). This
model has been supported to some extent by recent
clinic-based studies reporting impairing emotion dys-
regulation in 34%270% of adults with ADHD (57–61),
although population-based studies are needed (Table 1).
Aggressive behaviors are also prominent. In a population
study contrasting 950 adults with diagnosed or likely
ADHD and 20,000 unaffected adults (57), the ADHD
group had higher self-ratings of interpersonal conﬂict
and negative, conﬂictual social ties. Other cross-sectional
studies have compared adults whose childhood ADHD
has remitted and those whose ADHD has persisted. In
one such comparison (58), 55 adults with persistent
ADHD showed higher rates of emotion dysregulation
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
277
SHAW, STRINGARIS, NIGG, ET AL.
TABLE 1. Prevalence Estimates of Emotion Dysregulation in Children and Adults With ADHDa
Study
Participants
Deﬁnition of “Emotion
Dysregulation”
Impairment Criterion
Findings
Children and adolescents
Stringaris and
Goodman (51)
Population based; N=5326
Parent and self-report of
emotional lability
Severity ratings of
symptoms
occurring “a lot”
Parent rating of impairing
emotional lability: ADHD
alone, 38% (RRR=12
compared with
unaffected); ODD alone,
42% (RRR=14.7); self-
report: ADHD alone, 27%
(RRR=6.9); ODD alone,
14% (RRR=3.0)
Sobanski
et al. (52)
Family based; ADHD,
N=216; siblings, N=142
Conners emotional lability index,
parent and teacher ratings of
unpredictable mood changes,
temper tantrums; tearfulness;
low frustration tolerance
3 SD above population
norms
25% of ADHD probands had
emotional lability .3 SD
above population norms
Anastopoulos
et al. (53)
Family based; ADHD,
N=216; siblings, N=142
Conners emotional lability index
(see above)
Above 65th
percentile of
population norms
Elevated levels: ADHD, 47%;
unaffected, 15%
Spencer
et al. (54)
Clinic based; ADHD,
N=197; controls, N=224
Parent report of “dysregulation
proﬁle” based on Child Behavior
Checklist subscales of attention
problems, anxiety/depression,
and aggression
Scores 1–2 SD above
norms (above 2 SD,
considered bipolar
phenotype and
excluded)
ADHD, 44% with
dysregulation proﬁle;
controls, 2%
Sjöwall
et al. (35)
Clinic based; ADHD, N=102;
controls, N=102
Parent report of child’s ability to
regulate speciﬁc emotions
Not given
ADHD showed signiﬁcant
impairment compared
with controls in regulating
all emotions
Strine
et al. (55)
Population based; history of
ADHD, N=512; no history
of ADHD, N=8,169
Strength and Difﬁculties
Questionnaire, parent report
of emotional and conduct
problems, including: often
loses temper, often unhappy
(also clingy, fearful, somatic
complaints, and having worries)
Parent rating of each
symptom’s impact
Emotional problems: history
of ADHD, 23%; no history
of ADHD, 6.3%
Becker
et al. (56)
Clinic based; ADHD,
N=1,450
Strength and Difﬁculties
Questionnaire, parent report
of emotional problems (see
above)
Based on U.K.
population norms
40% of boys and 49% of
girls had abnormally
high levels of emotional
problems
Adult studies
Able et al. (57)
Population based (N=21,000);
diagnosed ADHD, N=198;
likely ADHD (based on
self-report scale), N=752;
controls, N=199
Self-report of tendency to become
angry, disagree, or be critical
of others; self-report of degree
to which others evoke feelings
of anger
Not given
Both diagnosed and likely
ADHD subjects more likely
to express anger, to
engage in conﬂict, and
to have been the target
of anger or intimidating
behavior
Barkley and
Fischer (58)
Clinic based; ADHD, N=55;
controls, N=75
Self-report of items reﬂecting
emotional impulsivity (taken
from the Behavior Rating of
Executive Functioning)
Symptom occurs “often” Impatient: ADHD, 72%;
controls, 3%; quick to
anger: ADHD, 65%;
controls, 6%; easily
frustrated: ADHD, 85%;
controls, 7%; emotionally
overexcitable: ADHD, 70%;
controls, 6%; easily
excitable: ADHD, 73%;
controls, 14%
Reimherr
et al. (59)
Clinic based; ADHD, N=536
(enrolled in treatment
trials)
Self-report of items from the
Wender-Reimherr Adult
Attention Disorder Rating
Scale: irritability and outbursts;
short, unpredictable mood shifts;
emotional overreactivity
2 SD above population
norms
32% met criteria for
emotion dysregulation
Reimherr
et al. (60)
Clinic based; ADHD, N=47
(enrolled in treatment trial)
Wender-Reimherr Adult
Attention Disorder Rating
Scale (see above)
2 SD above population
norms
78% met criteria for
emotion dysregulation
continued
278
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
EMOTION DYSREGULATION IN ADHD
(42%272%, depending on speciﬁc symptoms) than 80
adults with remitted ADHD (23%245%), although both
groups differed from healthy subjects. This suggests a
degree of developmental coherence: as symptoms of
ADHD improve, so may emotion dysregulation.
Impairment. The combination of ADHD and emotion
dysregulation represents a major source of impairment.
In a study of 1,500 children (74), emotional problems
were found to have a greater impact than hyperactivity
and inattention on well-being and self-esteem. Individ-
uals with ADHD and emotion dysregulation were sig-
niﬁcantly more impaired in peer relationships, family
life, occupational attainment, and academic perfor-
mance than those with ADHD alone (75), and this result
held after controlling for comorbid disorders, including
oppositional deﬁant disorder (76).
In summary, emotion dysregulation is found in some
25%245% of children and 30%270% of adults with
ADHD. It represents a major source of impairment and
presages a poor clinical outcome.
Pathophysiology
Several psychological and neural processes may un-
derpin the overlap between ADHD and emotion dysreg-
ulation. Recent models describe both “bottom-up”
processes that support or inﬂuence emotion regulation
and “top-down” processes, such as the allocation of
attention to emotionally arousing stimuli (77, 78). Most
studies reviewed in this section have either excluded
individuals with comorbid diagnoses (including opposi-
tional deﬁant disorder) or controlled for comorbidities,
ensuring that the anomalies pertain to ADHD rather than
to other disorders (Table 2).
Bottom-up psychological mechanisms. Two basic processes
affect emotion regulation: orienting to emotionally salient
stimuli, and the evaluation of signals for reward. In order for
emotion to be regulated, posterior attention systems must
both detect salient stimuli and signal that control is
needed (77, 90). Evidence suggests anomalies in early
orienting to emotional stimuli in ADHD. In healthy
individuals, affectively charged stimuli receive enhanced
early sensory encoding, detectable by electrophysiological
markers. Two studies (91, 92) found that this effect is
reduced in adults with ADHD when viewing positive, but
not negative stimuli; this would be expected to cause
overperception of negative stimuli. The studies further
linked these early processing deﬁcits with self-rated emo-
tional lability. Additionally, whereas the startle reﬂex is
typically accentuated by precursive positive stimuli and
attenuated by negative stimuli, this effect is lost in adults
with ADHD, which constitutes further evidence of abnor-
mal early processing of emotional stimuli in ADHD (93).
Likewise, the rapid and accurate recognition of emotions
in human faces or voices is central to well-regulated
behavior; emotional misperception is linked with aberrant
emotional responses, and misperception can itself result
from emotion dysregulation (94, 95). Studies of emotion
labeling have found moderate impairments in ADHD, with
our meta-analysis producing an effect size of 0.65 (95%
CI=0.48–0.81) (Figure 1B).
The evaluation of emotionally salient stimuli has also
been studied in relation to the evaluation of signals for
potential reward. A preference for immediate small re-
wards over larger delayed ones, even when such choice
defeats one’s own goals and desires, is held to be a hall-
mark of impulsivity, reﬂecting an aversion to delayed
reward (96, 97). Our meta-analysis found that ADHD was
also moderately associated with this preference (effect
size, 0.6, 95% CI=0.40–0.79), albeit with considerable
heterogeneity in results (35, 37) (Figure 1C). This style of
reward processing can be construed as a contributor to
emotion dysregulation, as it may reﬂect anomalous
activity in limbic regions that are pivotal in emotion
processing. Equally, the preference for immediate
small rewards might also reﬂect failures in top-down
regulatory mechanisms, such as the ability to hold longer-
term goals in mind or to exert cognitive control to suppress
the arousing value of immediate incentives (78, 98, 99).
Thus, anomalies in reward evaluation provide further,
albeit indirect, evidence for dysregulation of emotion
systems in ADHD.
Top-down regulatory processes. Parasympathetic response
is considered one gauge of regulatory functioning (100). In
typically developing children, autonomic nervous system
function tracks the valence of emotional stimuli and task
demands, with greater top-down regulatory activity when
stimuli are negative rather than positive (100). In children
with ADHD, this ability to adjust top-down regulation in
response to different emotional stimuli was partially lost,
based on physiological indicators of regulation.
TABLE 1. Prevalence Estimates of Emotion Dysregulation in Children and Adults With ADHDa (continued)
Study
Participants
Deﬁnition of “Emotion
Dysregulation”
Impairment Criterion
Findings
Adult studies
Surman
et al. (61)
Clinic based; ADHD, N=206;
controls, N=123
Barkley’s self-report scale: quick
to anger, loses temper,
argumentative, angry; easily
frustrated, touchy; overreactive
emotionally, easily excited
Above 95th
percentile on
population norms
Met criteria for emotion
dysregulation:
ADHD, 55%; controls, 3%
a ADHD=attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder; ODD=oppositional deﬁant disorder; RRR=relative risk ratio.
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
279
SHAW, STRINGARIS, NIGG, ET AL.
Another way to assess the recruitment of regulatory
resources is to consider the allocation of attention itself to
emotional stimuli. Just as emotion regulation requires the
ability to recruit autonomic responses, it also relies on
the ability to direct attention toward or away from emo-
tional stimuli so as to maintain emotional homeostasis or
maintain focus on a goal (101). This ability can be assessed
by incorporating an affective dimension in a cognitive
FIGURE 1. Forest Plots With Standardized Mean Difference Between ADHD and Comparison Groups in Measures of
Aggression, Emotion Recognition, and Reward Processinga
Study or Subgroup
Abikoff (boys) (9)
Abikoff (girls) (9)
Matthys (16)
Ohan (17)
Greene (15)
Mikami (girls) (11)
Mikami (boys) (11)
Buhrmester (14)
Zalecki (combined) (18)
King (19)
McQuade (13)
Cadesky (12)
Zalecki (inattentive) (18)
Hoza (10)
Waschbusch (20)
Total (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: tau2=3.61; χ2=1652.89, df=14 (p<0.00001); I2=99%
Test for overall effect: Z=3.87 (p=0.0001) 
SMDb
SMDb
A. Aggression
ADHD aggression
0
–2
–4
4
2
Study or Subgroup
Yuill (31)
Corbett (30)
Malisza (29)
Da Fonseca (28)
Boakes (21)
Cadesky (12)
Seymour (32)
Shin (27)
Rapport (23)
Dyck (25)
Pelc (26)
Downs (33)
Greenbaum (34)
Sjöwall (boys) (35)
Sjöwall (girls) (35)
Sinzig (22)
Miller (inattentive) (36)
Herpertz (24)
Miller (combined) (36)
Total (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: tau2=0.06; χ2=32.53, df=18 (p=0.02); I2=45%
Test for overall effect: Z=7.47 (p=0.00001) 
B. Emotion Recognition
–1
1
ADHD impaired
0
–2
2
Study or Subgroup
Plichta (38)
Kuntsi (44)
Marx (adult) (46)
Solanto (48)
Dalen (42)
Marco (child) (45)
Antrop (39)
Marx (child) (46)
Vloet (49)
Bitsakou (child) (41)
Marco (adolescent) (45)
Marx (adolescent) (46)
Yang (50)
Banaschewski (37)
Karalunas (43)
Sjöwall (boys) (35)
Bitsakou (adolescent) (41)
Bidwell (40)
Solanto (inattentive) (47)
Solanto (combined) (47)
Sjöwall (girls) (35)
Total (95% CI)
Heterogeneity: tau2=0.15; χ2=103.43, df=20 (p<0.00001); I2=81%
Test for overall effect: Z=6.03 (p=0.00001) 
SMDb
C. Reward Processing
–1
1
0
–2
2
a In panel A, more aggressive behavior is seen in the ADHD groups (the effect size for boys in the Abikoff study [9] was 14). In panel B, emotion
recognition deﬁcits are seen in ADHD. In panel C, reward processing is measured by the tendency to prefer immediate small rewards over
larger delayed ones; the ADHD participants show a tendency to prefer immediate, small rewards. Further details are provided in the online
data supplement.
b SMD=standardized mean difference, inverse variance, random effects, with 95% conﬁdence intervals.
280
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
EMOTION DYSREGULATION IN ADHD
paradigm. For example, in the emotional Stroop task,
individuals must deﬂect attention away from the emo-
tional properties, such as emotional expression, and at-
tend to a nonemotional feature, such as eye color. This
manipulation exacerbates the performance deﬁcits al-
ready evident in ADHD, suggesting that performance
drops off more steeply than it does in typical individuals
under emotional challenge (87, 89).
Finally, given that ADHD is associated with poor higher-
order cognitive control even in the absence of emotionally
salient stimuli, what role does poor cognitive control play
in emotion dysregulation in ADHD? Evidence suggests
a modest connection but not isomorphism. For example,
in 49 boys with and without ADHD, cognitive control,
indexed by response inhibition, accounted for 11% of the
variance in “dysregulated” behavior during a frustrating
task (102). A larger study of 424 children with ADHD and
their siblings (37) found that while a range of neuro-
psychological variables correlated with emotional lability,
this link was not direct but was mediated almost entirely
by the severity of ADHD symptoms.
In summary, emotion dysregulation in ADHD may
arise from deﬁcits at multiple levels. At the most basic
level, there are anomalies in orienting to emotional stimuli
and reward valuation. This is combined with failings in top-
down psychological processes, such as the allocation
of attention to emotional stimuli. Meanwhile, deﬁcits
in cognitive processes, including working memory and
response inhibition, may contribute to emotion dysregu-
lation, but by themselves they do not seem to explain its
presence in ADHD.
Neural mechanisms. It is useful to distinguish between
regions mediating bottom-up responses to emotional
stimuli—speciﬁcally the amygdala, ventral striatum, and
orbitofrontal cortex—and top-down cortical regions con-
trolling the allocation of attentional resources in emotionally
arousing contexts (77, 103). In ADHD, functional imag-
ing studies have yielded disparate ﬁndings, possibly
because of differences in tasks and sample characteristics
and limited power to detect effects in smaller studies,
but nonetheless some themes emerge (Table 2 and
Figure 3).
Amygdala activation during emotion processing in
ADHD has received some research attention. The larger
studies ﬁnd amygdala hyperactivation in ADHD, during
both the subliminal perception of fearful expressions and
while subjects rated their fear of neutral faces, although
results are mixed (24, 29, 79–82) (Table 2; see also the
online data supplement). Amygdala hyperactivation has
also been reported in ADHD during the processing of
delayed rewards, perhaps consistent with the delay
aversion found in some behavioral studies (38, 83–85).
Deﬁcits in early processing of visual emotional stimuli and
in the modulation of the startle reﬂex, described above, also
suggest amygdala dysfunction in ADHD. These functional
FIGURE 2. Correlations Between Infantile Temperament and Later Externalizing and ADHD Symptomsa
Study Author
Design
Early Temperament
Correlation
Outcome
Goldsmith 
et al. (64)
Longitudinal
Anger (infancy)
High approach (infancy)
0.14 *
0.19 *
ADHD symptoms (age 4)
ADHD symptoms (age 4)
Bates 
et al. (65)
Bates 
et al. (65)
Longitudinal
Resistance to control (6 months)
0.30 **
Externalizing symptoms (age 8)
Mixed design
Resistance to control (6 months)
0.32 **
Externalizing symptoms (age 8)
Carlson 
et al. (66)
Longitudinal
Infant adaptability (3 months)
0.10 (n.s.)
0.06 (n.s.)
Hyperactivity (age 8)
Hyperactivity (age 11)
Olson 
et al. (67)
Longitudinal
Fussy/difficult (6 months)
0.01 (n.s.)
0.15 (n.s.)
Behavioral control (age 8)
Inhibitory control (age 8)
a n.s.=not signiﬁcant.
*p,0.05. **p,0.01.
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
281
SHAW, STRINGARIS, NIGG, ET AL.
TABLE 2. Summary of Functional MRI Studies of Emotion Perception, Reward Processing, and the Allocation of Attention
to Emotional Stimulia
Study
Participants
Task
Behavioral results
fMRI results
Emotion perception and recognition
Brotman
et al. (79)
ADHD with no comorbidity,
N=18; severe mood
dysregulation, N=29 (24 with
ADHD); bipolar affective
disorder, N=43 (20 with
ADHD); healthy, N=37
Rating of fear, nose width,
and passive viewing of
neutral, fearful, happy,
and angry faces
Rating of fear in neutral
faces: severe mood
dysregulation = bipolar
. healthy; ADHD did not
differ from any group
Left amygdala activity
during fear ratings: ADHD
. healthy = bipolar .
severe mood
dysregulation
Marsh
et al. (80)
ADHD with no comorbidity,
N=12; callous-unemotional
traits, N=12; healthy, N=12
Gender judgments
on fearful, neutral,
and angry faces
No group differences in
accuracy; ADHD had
slower reaction times
Amygdala activity in ADHD
during fear processing
did not differ from healthy
Posner
et al. (81)
ADHD, N=15 (mix of
medication
naive and receiving
psychostimulants; some
had ODD, although the
number is unclear);
healthy, N=15
Subliminal presentation
of fearful face followed
by supraliminal
presentation of neutral
expression on the same
face; postscan face
memory test
No group differences
Greater activity in
medication-naive ADHD
in amygdala and stronger
functional connectivity
with lateral prefrontal
cortex (BA47)
Herpertz
et al. (24)
ADHD without comorbidity,
N=13; conduct disorder,
N=22 (16 with ADHD);
healthy, N=22
Passive viewing of
negative, positive,
and neutral scenes
Subjects with conduct
disorder rated emotional
pictures as less arousing
than did other groups
Increased left amygdala
activation in conduct
disorder with ADHD,
not ADHD alone; ADHD
alone had decreased
insula activation to
negative faces
Schlochtermeier
et al. (82)
Adults treated in childhood
for ADHD with no
comorbidity, N=10; adults
with childhood ADHD,
medication naive, N=10;
healthy, N=10
Rating of positive and
negative pictures
Adults with ADHD treated
in childhood rated
neutral pictures as more
pleasant than medication
naive and healthy subjects
Decreased ventral striatum
and subgenual cingulate
activation in medication-
naive adults with history
of ADHD; ADHD treated
in childhood did not
differ from healthy
Malisza
et al. (29)
ADHD, N=9; autism, N=9;
healthy, N=9
View happy and angry
faces and respond to
happy
Accuracy: autism
, ADHD = healthy
ADHD had less fusiform,
temporal poles activity
than healthy; ADHD
showed same amygdala
activity as healthy;
autism showed less
amygdala activity than
other two groups
Reward processing
Ströhle
et al. (83)
Adult ADHD without
comorbidity, N=10;
controls, N=10
Monetary incentive delay
No group differences
Decreased ventral striatum
activation in ADHD
during reward
anticipation, and
increased orbitofrontal
activation during
reward receipt
Plichta
et al. (38)
Adult ADHD without
comorbidity, N=14;
controls, N=12
Delayed discounting task
(choose between
immediate
small and delayed
large rewards)
No group differences
Decreased ventral striatum
activation in ADHD
during processing of
both immediate and
delayed rewards; within
subjects, delayed reward
in ADHD associated with
increased activity of
amygdala and caudate
Scheres
et al. (84)
Adolescent ADHD, N=11;
controls, N=11
Monetary incentive delay
No group differences
Decreased ventral striatal
activity in ADHD during
reward anticipation
Stoy et al. (85)
Adult ADHD, N=24 (analyzed
as remitted versus persistent,
and as history of childhood
treatment with
psychostimulants versus
medication naive);
controls, N=12
Monetary incentive delay
No group differences
Decreased insula activation
during outcome of loss
avoidance in medication-
naive adults compared
with other groups
continued
282
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
EMOTION DYSREGULATION IN ADHD
deﬁcits align with reports of amygdala structural abnormali-
ties in ADHD, including surface morphology and dopamine
receptor density (104).
The orbitofrontal cortex, which has rich interconnec-
tions with the amygdala, the thalamus, and multiple
cortical regions, is pivotal in emotion regulation and re-
ward representations (77, 105). Some data suggest orbito-
frontal anatomic anomalies (106) and abnormal activation
during the anticipation and receipt of rewards in ADHD.
There is also decreased connectivity between the amyg-
dala and the orbitofrontal cortex, reﬂected in a loss of the
typical correlation between the volumes of these struc-
tures (104).
The ventral striatum is the third important hub in the
bottom-up circuitry, partly by virtue of its role in mediat-
ing positive affect and reward processing (107). Functional
neuroimaging studies ﬁnd reduced ventral striatum re-
sponsiveness in ADHD during the anticipation (and re-
ceipt) of rewards, thus contributing to aversion to delay
(Table 2). By examining brain activity at rest in ADHD, two
groups have reported both increased functional connectiv-
ity between the ventral striatum and the orbitofrontal/
ventromedial prefrontal cortex and decreased connectivity
between these regions and cortical attentional control
regions (108, 109). Thus, evidence suggests dysfunction in
a network encompassing the amygdala, ventral striatum,
and orbitofrontal cortex that processes emotional stimuli
and is implicated in emotion regulation.
With regard to cortical regions, in healthy subjects the
addition of an emotional dimension to cognitive tasks
usually boosts top-down prefrontal cortical activation
(particularly
in ventrolateral,
medial prefrontal,
and
anterior cingulate cortical regions) and diminishes sub-
cortical activity (77). These patterns are partly lost in
ADHD. Speciﬁcally, when negative stimuli are added to a
working memory task, performance deﬁcits in ADHD
are associated with hypoactivation in prefrontal control
regions, including the ventrolateral, orbitofrontal, and
medial prefrontal cortices. However, when positive
stimuli are used, ADHD patients show hyperactivation
in these regions (87). Similarly, two independent studies
using the emotional Stroop task (88, 89) found hypoacti-
vation in ADHD in the right medial and ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex while processing negative distractors but
hyperactivation in the left medial prefrontal cortex while
processing positive distractors. Such work represents the
TABLE 2. Summary of Functional MRI Studies of Emotion Perception, Reward Processing, and the Allocation of Attention
to Emotional Stimulia (continued)
Study
Participants
Task
Behavioral results
fMRI results
Reward processing
Rubia
et al. (86)
Childhood ADHD on and
off psychostimulants,
N=13 (1 with comorbid
ODD); healthy, N=13
Rewarded continuous
performance task
No difference between
medicated ADHD and
healthy; trend to worse
performance in
unmedicated ADHD
Unmedicated ADHD showed
orbitofrontal
hyperactivation during
reward receipt,
normalized by
psychostimulants
Control of attention to emotional stimuli
Passarotti
et al. (87)
Adolescent ADHD without
comorbidity (N=14);
bipolar disorder, N=23;
healthy, N=19
Working memory task
using angry, happy,
and neutral faces
Accuracy: healthy .
ADHD . bipolar
ADHD compared with
healthy: decreased
prefrontal and striatal
activation to angry faces,
increased to happy;
ADHD compared with
bipolar: similar cortical
anomalies, more
prominent subcortical
anomalies in bipolar
Passarotti
et al. (88)
Adolescent ADHD without
comorbidity (N=15); bipolar
disorder, N=17;
healthy, N=15
Emotional Stroop test
Bipolar and ADHD slower
than healthy; more
interference from
positive distractors in
bipolar and from
negative distractors
in ADHD
For negative versus neutral
words: gradient of
ventrolateral prefrontal
cortical activation: ADHD
, healthy , bipolar; both
ADHD and bipolar showed
more dorsolateral
prefrontal and parietal
activation than healthy
Posner
et al. (89)
Adolescent ADHD, on and
off psychostimulants,
N=15; healthy, N=15
Emotional Stroop test
Medication-free ADHD
showed medial
prefrontal hyperactivity
with positive and
hypoactivity with
negative distractors;
normalized on
psychostimulants
a ADHD=attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder; ODD=oppositional deﬁant disorder.
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
283
SHAW, STRINGARIS, NIGG, ET AL.
ﬁrst stage in charting the neural basis of dysregulated
attentional control in ADHD in the presence of emotional
stimuli.
In summary, emotion dysregulation in ADHD impli-
cates dysfunction in the amygdala, ventral striatum, and
orbitofrontal cortex, which could be regarded as the
bottom-up contributor. Regions at the interface of cog-
nition and emotion (the medial and ventrolateral pre-
frontal cortex) may underpin the abnormal allocation
of attention to emotional stimuli and could thus
be regarded as the major top-down contributor to
emotion dysregulation in ADHD (Figure 2). Higher
cortical centers involved in motor control (supplemen-
tary motor areas, motor cortex), monitoring for salient
stimuli (temporoparietal junction, frontal operculum),
and shifting attention ﬂexibly (frontal eye ﬁelds, intra-
parietal sulcus) may play a less direct role (110). The exact
balance of symptoms stemming from ADHD and emotion
dysregulation in an individual may depend on the degree
to which each neural network or level is compromised. We
predict that dysfunction at the cortical nexus between
cognition and emotion (the medial and ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex) is strongly associated with symptoms
of both ADHD and emotion dysregulation. If, however, an
individual has dysfunction that is more focused in higher,
more lateral prefrontal/parietal cortical regions, then in
that individual symptoms of ADHD such as inattention
would predominate over emotion dysregulation. Con-
versely, an individual with predominantly (para)limbic
dysfunction may exhibit mainly symptoms stemming
from emotion dysregulation.
Etiological factors. It has been proposed that the combi-
nation of ADHD and emotion dysregulation deﬁnes a
distinct genetic group. In support of this view, one group
found that the siblings of probands with both ADHD and
emotion dysregulation also had signiﬁcantly elevated rates
of this combination, although this has not been replicated
(52, 111, 112). The Child Behavior Checklist-deﬁned dys-
regulation proﬁle is highly heritable (67%) (113), and stud-
ies have suggested candidate genes (114).
Among possible environmental factors, high levels of
parental criticism and hostility have been linked both with
the development of conduct problems in children with
ADHD and with the development of childhood ADHD in
preschoolers with behavioral problems (115, 116). A
plausible hypothesis is that failures of parental emotion
regulation, reﬂected by high expressed hostility, contrib-
ute to the development of emotion dysregulation in
children with ADHD.
Treatment
The management of emotion dysregulation in ADHD
presents formidable therapeutic challenges, partly be-
cause clinical trials in ADHD either fail to assess change in
FIGURE 3. Neural Circuits Implicated in Emotion Dysregulation in ADHDa
Medial PFC/ACC
pOFC
Ventral
Striatum
Early
Visual
Regions
Parietal Cortex
Dorsolateral PFC
VLPFC
Amygdala
a The circuitry that underpins deﬁcits in early orienting to emotional stimuli and their perception is shown in red. Regions that interface
between emotional and cognitive circuits, allocating attention to emotional stimuli, are shown in yellow. Circuitry implicated in cognitive
control, motor planning, and attention is shown in blue. ACC=anterior cingulate cortex; pOFC=posterior orbitofrontal cortex; PFC=prefrontal
cortex; VLPFC=ventrolateral prefrontal cortex.
284
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
EMOTION DYSREGULATION IN ADHD
emotion regulation or do so as a secondary outcome
measure. Psychostimulants are highly effective in treat-
ing oppositional deﬁant disorder comorbid with ADHD
(meta-analyses are available at http://www.nice.org.uk/
CG72). However, evidence for psychostimulant efﬁ-
cacy in treating emotion dysregulation in ADHD is
more limited (Table 3). A review found that two
randomized placebo-controlled studies in children with
ADHD reported that psychostimulants reduced emotional
lability and irritability (127). In adults, several studies found
that the beneﬁcial effects of psychostimulants on emotion
dysregulation parallel the improvement seen in hyperac-
tivity and impulsivity. However, two randomized con-
trolled trials comparing amphetamine and placebo found
no beneﬁcial medication impact on a broad range of
emotional problems, and some studies have found that
amphetamine preparations increase irritability and la-
bility (127).
Among individuals with ADHD, psychostimulants also
improve emotion recognition (91) and normalize both the
startle modulation by affective stimuli (93) and perfor-
mance on the emotional Stroop task (89). This behavioral
normalization is accompanied by normalization of un-
derlying neural activity (89, 91, 93).
Among the non-stimulant treatments, improvement of
emotion regulation on atomoxetine paralleled improve-
ment in core symptoms of ADHD among adults (59). Mood
stabilizers have yielded mixed results. A trial of lithium for
children with severe mood dysregulation, most of whom
had ADHD, was negative (128). However, a comparison of
behavioral therapy combined with either divalproex or
stimulants found that the use of divalproex was more
efﬁcacious in children with severe aggressive behavior,
most of whom also had ADHD (129). Another study found
that among 30 children with ADHD whose aggression
did not respond to open-label psychostimulant treat-
ment and behavioral therapy, the addition of divalproex
resulted in signiﬁcantly higher rates of remission com-
pared with placebo (130). The use of atypical antipsychotic
medications for the combination of ADHD, emotion dys-
regulation, and aggression still lacks a clear evidence
base.
While cognitive and behavioral psychotherapies have
a limited impact on core symptoms of ADHD, there is
preliminary evidence that interventions that speciﬁcally
target emotion dysregulation are efﬁcacious (131, 132). We
consider such interventions to be a promising future direc-
tion for research.
The current literature suggests the following treat-
ment approach. Psychostimulant treatment of the core
symptoms of ADHD is often linked to a beneﬁcial effect
on emotion dysregulation and should be considered
ﬁrst-line treatment. Atomoxetine also appears effective
for symptoms of ADHD and emotion dysregulation. Use
of adjunctive behavioral modiﬁcation in children is
reasonable, as this combination is effective in those with
mixed internalizing and externalizing symptoms, many
of whom have emotional dysregulation (51, 133). Group-
based psychotherapy in adults with ADHD to bolster
emotion regulation skills shows promise but requires
replication (132). Lacking an evidence base for second-
line pharmacological approaches to emotion dysregula-
tion in ADHD, treatment will be guided largely by the
presence of comorbid disorders. For example, for
patients with ADHD and depression, in whom emotion
dysregulation is often prominent, use of serotonin re-
uptake inhibitors combined with psychostimulants is
reasonable (134).
Conceptual Models
Three models have been proposed, whose proponents
can be characterized as “lumpers,” who view emotion
dysregulation as an integral component of ADHD; “split-
ters,” who view the combination as deﬁning a distinct
entity; and “diplomats,” who view symptoms of ADHD
and emotion dysregulation as correlated but ultimately
dissociable dimensions (Table 4). The current evidence is
insufﬁcient to choose decisively among these models,
partly because few studies have been designed to
address speciﬁcally the question of why emotion dysreg-
ulation is so prominent in ADHD. However, this frame-
work generates testable hypotheses that can stimulate
future research.
The ﬁrst model, which harks back to earlier conceptu-
alizations of ADHD, posits that emotion dysregulation is
a core deﬁning feature of ADHD that is as central to the
disorder as hyperactivity, impulsivity, and inattention (135).
Emotion dysregulation is seen as an expression of the same
neurocognitive deﬁcits that underpin other symptoms of
ADHD, and Occam’s razor dictates that it is unnecessary to
invoke additional emotion processing deﬁcits. The model
is parsimonious and recognizes the close associations be-
tween cognitive and emotional regulation systems. However,
as noted above, the overlap between ADHD and emotion
dysregulation is far from complete: many ADHD pa-
tients do not exhibit impairing levels of emotion dysreg-
ulation (55%275% of children and 30%270% of adults
with ADHD). Additionally, the evidence for widespread
(para)limbic dysfunction in ADHD and associated def-
icits in emotional processes might argue against a re-
ductionist model of emotion dysregulation in ADHD as
another expression of purely cortico-striatal-cerebellar
dysfunction. This model also predicts that treatments
that ameliorate core symptoms would have an almost
equal impact on emotion dysregulation, which seems to
occur in adulthood but does so less clearly in childhood.
The second model holds that the combination of
ADHD and emotion dysregulation deﬁnes a distinct en-
tity (111, 112). This model has been generated largely on
the basis of genetic ﬁndings of familial cosegregation of
ADHD and emotion dysregulation, although evidence on
this point is mixed (52, 111). This model could imply both
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
285
SHAW, STRINGARIS, NIGG, ET AL.
a distinct neurocognitive etiology and a distinct clinical
course for those with the combination of ADHD and
emotion dysregulation, a possibility that warrants further
testing.
The third model holds that symptoms of ADHD and
emotion dysregulation are distinct but correlated di-
mensions, each underpinned by partly overlapping but
dissociable neurocognitive deﬁcits. This model has much
TABLE 3. Randomized Controlled Treatment Studies in Children and Adults With ADHD in Which Change in Measures
Reﬂecting Emotion Dysregulation Was Measureda
Study
Participants
Measures
Results
Children
Childress
et al. (117)
Lisdexamphetamine versus placebo
for 4 weeks, N=283; at baseline
179 had prominent emotional
lability
Conners Parent Rating Scale of emotional
lability (angry/resentful, losing temper,
and irritability); prominent emotional
lability deﬁned as having at least one
symptom “pretty much” or “very much”
For those with prominent
emotional lability, medication
was associated with a signiﬁcant
reduction in emotional
symptoms; no change in
emotionality seen in those
with low emotional lability
Ahmann
et al. (118)
Crossover design; treated with
placebo or low-dosage (0.3 mg/kg)
and higher-dosage (0.5 mg/kg)
methylphenidate; N=234
Side effect questionnaire including items
on dysthymia, euphoria, irritability,
and anxiety
Decreased irritability on
methylphenidate (odds
ratio=0.33, 95% CI=0.18–0.61)
Gillberg
et al. (119)
Amphetamine versus placebo
for 6 months, N=56
Side effect questionnaire including
items on dysthymia, euphoria,
irritability, and anxiety
No differences between treated
and placebo groups
Kratochvil
et al. (120)
Atomoxetine versus placebo,
for 8 weeks, N=179
Emotion and Expression Scale
for Children
No difference between
atomoxetine and placebo
Coghill et al. (121)
Crossover methylphenidate
0.3 mg/kg and 0.6 mg/kg
versus placebo for 12 weeks,
N=75
Conners’ emotional lability subscale
Signiﬁcant reduction in
emotional lability for both
low-dosage (parent-report
effect size, 0.46; teacher-report
effect size, 0.45) and
high-dosage methylphenidate
(parent-report effect size, 0.42;
teacher-report effect size, 0.79)
Herbert et al. (122)
Randomized to waiting list or
parent training to boost child’s
emotion regulation and
socialization, N=31
Emotion Regulation Checklist
Parent training linked with
moderate reduction of child’s
emotional lability (effect size,
0.27–0.45).
Webster-Stratton
et al. (123)
Randomized to waiting list or
parenting program boosting
positive and consistent
parenting style, N=99
Emotion regulation scale
Moderate effect of intervention
on emotion regulation
(effect size, 0.25)
Adults
Reimherr
et al. (60)
Crossover trial of extended-release
methylphenidate versus placebo
(4 weeks each arm), N=47
Wender-Reimherr adult ADHD scale,
emotion dysregulation items
Decrease in emotion dysregulation
on methylphenidate (effect
size, 0.7)
Reimherr
et al. (59)
Post hoc analyses of trials comparing
atomoxetine and placebo;
ADHD only, N=359; ADHD and
emotion dysregulation, N=170
Wender-Reimherr adult ADHD scale,
emotion dysregulation items
Decrease in emotion dysregulation
on atomoxetine (effect size, 0.66)
Marchant
et al. (124)
Crossover trial of transdermal
methylphenidate versus placebo
(4 weeks each arm); ADHD alone,
N=21; ADHD and emotion
dysregulation, N=28; ADHD and
oppositional deﬁant disorder, N=9;
ADHD, oppositional deﬁant
disorder, and emotion
dysregulation, N=32
Wender-Reimherr adult ADHD scale,
emotion dysregulation items
All groups showed beneﬁt on
psychostimulants; trend for
those with emotion
dysregulation to improve most
Rösler et al. (125)
Methylphenidate versus
placebo with 24-week
double-blind phase, N=363
Wender-Reimherr adult ADHD scale,
emotion dysregulation items
Methylphenidate reduced
emotional lability (effect
size, 0.28–0.4)
Emilsson
et al. (126)
Cognitive behavioral therapy and
medication versus medication
alone, N=54
Self-report scale of emotional control
Combination group did not
show signiﬁcantly better
emotional control at end
of intervention but did 3
months following intervention
(d=1.12)
a All medication studies were randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trials.
286
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
EMOTION DYSREGULATION IN ADHD
in common with the concept of multiple but overlapping
pathways to ADHD (103, 110). It is supported by the sig-
niﬁcant but modest correlations between symptoms of
ADHD and emotion dysregulation reviewed earlier; the
symptom domains commonly coexist but are far from com-
pletely overlapping. Similarly, modest correlations have
been reported between deﬁcits in emotional processes—
such as deﬁcits in emotion recognition and frustration
tolerance—and the executive dysfunction often held to be
a core feature of the disorder (35, 37). Longitudinal data
reviewed earlier also suggest modest links between the
course of ADHD symptoms and emotion dysregulation in
early childhood, and perhaps in adulthood, consistent with
a model of correlated but distinct symptom dimensions.
Future Research Directions
Phenomenology and Pathophysiology
Reﬁnement of the phenotype is needed, as emotion
dysregulation in individuals with ADHD is likely to have
a number of clinically important components, such as
irritability and mood lability (4, 51). It will be important to
operationalize each component, develop consensus mea-
surement techniques, and conduct longitudinal studies to
deﬁne how the developmental trajectories of the compo-
nents interact with each other and with the dimensions
of ADHD. Pathophysiological studies should include
individuals lying along the spectrum of emotion regulation
abilities, but perhaps oversample those most in clinical
need, lying at the extreme of dysregulation. Such work would
allow direct links to be made between emotion dysregula-
tion in ADHD and the underlying neural anomalies—a link
that has been made in relatively few studies.
Functional imaging studies should include a broad
range of tasks of emotion regulation, deﬁning the neural
bases of the ability to reinterpret the meaning of emotional
stimuli, the adaptive suppression of ongoing emotional
responses, and the ability to employ strategies such as
distancing oneself from emotionally arousing materials
(77). We predict that emotionally dysregulated individuals
with ADHD would lose the coordinated increase in medial
prefrontal/anterior cingulate cortex activation and altered
amygdala activation that underpins many forms of emotion
regulation.
To what extent do individuals with ADHD develop
emotion dysregulation for reasons different from those of
individuals with other disorders? Could ADHD-speciﬁc
symptoms or cognitive aberrations be related to emotion
dysregulation? “Mind wandering” is one candidate cogni-
tive mechanism. It is typically measured as interference in
tasks of cognitive control and appears to be related to
a failure to deactivate the so-called default mode network
of the brain, a deﬁcit also found in ADHD (136). Notably,
mind wandering appears to lead to transient dysphoric
mood and vice versa (137). Testing the links between
TABLE 4. Three Models to Explain the Overlap Between ADHD and Emotion Dysregulation
Phenomenology
Pathophysiology
Model
Correlations
Between ADHD
and Emotion
Dysregulation
Clinical Course
Psychological Basis
Neural Basis
Genetic
Treatment
Emotion
dysregulation is
integral to
ADHD
Extremely high
Yoked clinical
courses for
symptoms of
ADHD and
emotion
dysregulation
Deﬁcits in behavioral
inhibition and
working memory
mediate both core
ADHD symptoms
and emotion
dysregulation
Anomalies
conﬁned to
fronto-striatal-
cerebellar circuits
Same genetic
basis for
ADHD with
emotion
dysregulation
and ADHD
alone
Treatments that
improve
ADHD will
improve
emotion
dysregulation
Combined
ADHD and
emotion
dysregulation
deﬁnes a
distinct entity
ADHD subgroup
exists that is
high on both
symptom
domains
Distinct clinical
course for
ADHD with
emotion
dysregulation
and ADHD alone
Distinct cognitive
deﬁcits in
ADHD with
emotion
dysregulation
and ADHD alone
Distinct neural
bases for
ADHD with
emotion
dysregulation
and ADHD
alone
Distinct genetic
bases for ADHD
with emotion
dysregulation
and ADHD
alone
Existing
treatments
for ADHD
may be less
effective for
ADHD with
emotion
dysregulation
Symptoms
of ADHD
and emotion
dysregulation
are correlated
but distinct
dimensions
Modest
Similar but
dissociable
clinical courses
for symptoms
of ADHD
and emotion
dysregulation
Deﬁcits in emotion
processing mediate
dysregulation and
correlate with
deﬁcits mediating
core ADHD
symptoms
Anomalies extend
beyond fronto-
striato-cerebellar
circuits to
(para)limbic
regions
Some genes
shared between
ADHD alone
and ADHD with
emotion
dysregulation
Treating “core”
ADHD
symptoms
beneﬁts
emotion
dysregulation,
but separate
treatment
may also
be needed
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
287
SHAW, STRINGARIS, NIGG, ET AL.
attentional lapses and emotion dysregulation and the
possible mediating role of the default mode network may
be a promising research avenue.
There is evidence in ADHD of an altered structural and
functional maturation of the prefrontal cortical regions
that support top-down emotion regulation (138). Could
disrupted developmental trajectories be particularly pro-
nounced among those with both ADHD and impaired
emotion regulation? Our model predicts a disruption of
white matter tracts such as the uncinate fasciculus that
connect limbic regions, including the amygdala, hippo-
campus, and orbitofrontal cortex; these tracts can be
assessed using diffusion tensor imaging.
Behavioral genetic data on twins could parse out the
degree to which ADHD and emotion dysregulation share
genetic or environmental risk factors. This could be
achieved by reanalysis of existing data sets that include
measures of irritability and other relevant traits. Studies
of environmental risk factors have focused on familial
characteristics but could also deﬁne the characteristics of
a child’s peer group that confer vulnerability to emotion
dysregulation.
Treatment
Is a two-pronged pharmacological approach targeting
both the symptoms of ADHD and those of emotion
dysregulation more effective than use of psychostimulants
alone? This question is being examined in children with
severe mood dysregulation (most of whom have ADHD)
in trials that use both psychostimulants and selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) (clinicaltrials.gov
identiﬁers NCT00794040, NCT01714310). The use of SSRIs
is grounded in preclinical studies showing that the modu-
lation of serotonergic tone affects the processing of emotion-
ally charged stimuli and clinical studies showing efﬁcacy in
promoting emotion regulation in other disorders (139).
Other agents show promise. Postsynaptic alpha-2 adre-
noceptor agonists such as guanfacine treat core symptoms
of ADHD and oppositionality (140). In healthy adults,
guanfacine reverses the bias to respond less accurately to
negative compared with positive emotional stimuli, partly
by boosting activation of the left dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (141). Given the interactions between the lateral
prefrontal cortex and the ventral/medial prefrontal corti-
cal regions linked to emotion regulation, guanfacine
emerges as a potential emotion regulator in ADHD.
Modaﬁnil, which inhibits dopamine and norepinephrine
transporters and decreases GABA, also shows promise as
a treatment for ADHD (142). In healthy adults, modaﬁnil
decreases amygdala activation during the viewing of
fearful stimuli and boosts prefrontal cortical activation
during executive functions (143). Again, this proﬁle points
to a possible beneﬁt for ADHD and associated emotion
dysregulation. Dietary interventions can be considered,
as there appears to be beneﬁt from omega-3 fatty acid
supplementation in ADHD (131). Given that low levels of
omega-3 fatty acids are associated with electrophysiolog-
ical anomalies during emotion processing in ADHD (144),
might emotion dysregulation in ADHD also beneﬁt from
supplementation?
Which psychotherapies are promising? Cognitive ther-
apy can help individuals with ADHD recognize and label
emotions accurately, challenge emotions that are not
context appropriate, and cope with intense negative
emotional reactions (132). These skills have been aug-
mented with mindfulness training that promotes a non-
judgmental, present-centered focused awareness of
emotions. This approach, derived partly from dialectical
behavior therapy for disorders with prominent emotion
dysregulation, such as borderline personality disorder, is
currently being assessed in adults with ADHD (73).
Improving executive functions such as working memory
and planning abilities helps core ADHD symptoms in
adults, but future studies should also ask if these cognitive
interventions also improve emotion regulation (132).
Similarly, it has been argued that parent-led games can
boost a preschooler’s executive skills and might prevent
later ADHD (145, 146). Might such early intervention also
promote emotion regulation?
What of interventions that target not just the individual
with ADHD but also the individual’s social context? For
example, there is a strong rationale for family-based
interventions to decrease negative family dynamics and
thus perhaps enhance emotion regulation in both the
parent and the child with ADHD (115). A novel approach
leverages a child’s peer group as a therapeutic ally (147).
Children with ADHD often form cliques with disruptive
others, and classroom interventions might promote alli-
ances with less disruptive children who can perhaps better
model emotion regulation.

## Clinical Significance
Conclusions
Since Still described the “morbid excitability” of children
with ADHD (148), the presence of emotion dysregulation
in ADHD has been well recognized. Recent advances in the
behavioral, neuroimaging, and genomic sciences hold the
promise that our renewed focus on this overlap will result
in an understanding of the underlying pathophysiological
mechanisms and stimulate novel treatment approaches.
Received July 23, 2013; revision received Oct. 21, 2013; accepted
Nov. 18, 2013 (doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.13070966). From the
Section on Neurobehavioral Clinical Research, Social and Behavioral
Research Branch, Division of Intramural Research Programs, National
Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, Md.; the Section on
Bipolar Spectrum Disorders, Emotion and Development Branch,
Division of Intramural Research Programs, NIMH, Bethesda; the
NIMH Intramural Program, Bethesda; the Institute of Psychiatry,
King’s College London; and the Division of Psychology, Department
of Psychiatry, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland.
Address correspondence to Dr. Shaw (shawp@mail.nih.gov).
Dr. Stringaris is a Wellcome Trust Fellow and also receives funding
from the U.K. Department of Health and the Biomedical Research
Centre of the National Institute of Health Research, U.K.; he receives
288
ajp.psychiatryonline.org
Am J Psychiatry 171:3, March 2014
EMOTION DYSREGULATION IN ADHD
royalties from Cambridge University Press. The other authors report
no ﬁnancial relationships with commercial interests.

## References
References
1. Clements SD: Minimal Brain Dysfunction in Children: Termi-
nology and Identiﬁcation: Phase One of a Three-Phase Project.
Washington, DC, US Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare, 1966
2. Thompson RA: Emotion Regulation: A Theme in Search of
Deﬁnition. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development, vol 59, issue 2/3, Feb 1994, pp 25–52
3. Leibenluft E: Severe mood dysregulation, irritability, and the
diagnostic boundaries of bipolar disorder in youths. Am J
Psyc...
---
