---
# Neural basis of impaired emotion recognition in adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
**Autores**: Agnieszka Zuberer
**Año**: 2020
**Journal**: Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, Journal Pre-proof. doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2020.11.013
**DOI/Link**: N/A

## Abstract
Abstract 
Background 
Deficits in emotion recognition have been repeatedly documented in patients diagnosed with attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), but their neural basis is unknown so far.

## Key Findings
Discussion 
187 
To our knowledge, this is the first neuroimaging study investigating the neural basis of emotion 
188 
recognition in adult ADHD patients. We utilized an explicit emotion categorization task (19) and 
189 
presented emotions in different sensory modalities (facial expressions, prosody, and their 
190 
combination) allowing us to delineate key areas for emotion processing including posterior 
191 
STG/MTG, thalamus, and amygdala. Adult ADHD patients exhibited diminished activation in the 
192 
right posterior STG/MTG and the thalamus suggesting that processing of emotions is disrupted both in 
193 
Journal Pre-proof
10 
 
early and late processing. The only ROI showing a correlation between recognition rates and 
194 
activation was the right STG/MTG suggesting its activity has direct consequences for behavior. 
195 
 
196 
Behavior 
197 
Participants identified audiovisually presented emotions better than auditory or visual stimuli alone. 
198 
This enhanced performanc... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
Methods 
In the current study, adult ADHD patients (n=44) and healthy controls (HC) (n=43) underwent 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) during explicit emotion recognition of stimuli 
expressing affective information in face, voice, or face-voice combinations. The employed 
experimental paradigm allowed us to delineate areas for processing audiovisual information based on 
their functional activation profile including bilateral posterior superior temporal gyrus/middle 
temporal gyrus (STG/MTG), amygdala, medial prefrontal cortex, and precuneus as well as the right 
posterior thalamus.

## Results
Results 
As expected, unbiased hit rates for correct classification of the expressed emotions were lower in 
ADHD patients than healthy controls irrespective of the sensory modality. This deficit at behavioral 
level was accompanied by lower activation in ADHD patients versus HC in the cortex adjacent to the 
right STG/MTG as well as the right posterior thalamus which represent key areas for processing 
socially relevant signals and their integration across modalities. The cortex adjacent to the right pSTS 
was the only brain region which showed a significant correlation between brain activation and 
behavioral data (unbiased hit rates).

## Clinical Significance
Conclusions 
Altogether these results provide first evidence for a potential neural substrate of the observed 
impairments in emotion recognition in an adult ADHD. (219 words) 
 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof
3 
 
 
Introduction 
1 
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) is characterized by inattention, motor hyperactivity 
2 
and hyperactivity (1). It interferes with impulse and emotional control leading to impaired social 
3 
interactions und subsequent mental health problems (2). ADHD was first described in children, but it 
4 
is meanwhile accepted that it persists into adulthood in roughly every second patient although with 
5 
partly altered symptomatology (1, 2). Social interaction deficits of ADHD patients are well known (3) 
6 
and behavioral research documented impaired emotion recognition for facial expressions (4) and 
7 
prosody in children (5-7) and adults (8-11) with ADHD. Such emotion recognition deficits correlate 
8 
with attention parameters (11, 12), but inattention cannot fully explain impairments in emotion 
9 
perception (11) arguing for a social cognition deficit of ADHD patients in its own right (13). 
10 
Two imaging studies investigating processing of facial emotions revealed hyperactivation of the 
11 
amygdalae during overt (14) as well as subliminal presentation (15) while a third study argued for 
12 
hypoactivation of the amygdala which is modulated by medication with methylphenidate (16). 
13 
Concerning emotional prosody, a near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) study revealed hypoactivation to 
14 
anger prosody within the right superior temporal gyrus (17) which has been implicated in procession 
15 
of emotional voices (18). So far, however, it is unknown whether the brain areas responsible for 
16 
binding emotional information expressed in voice and face (i.e. audiovisual integration areas) exhibit 
17 
an altered activation profile and to which extent such differences correlate with behavior. 
18 
In this study, we examined processing of emotional information presented in voice, face, or face-voice 
19 
combinations in adult ADHD patients versus healthy controls (HC) using functional magnetic 
20 
resonance imaging (fMRI). The employed experiment was evaluated in a behavioral study (11) in 
21 
ADHD patients as well as an fMRI study in HC (19). Thus, we had straightforward hypotheses 
22 
regarding behavioral effects (i.e. lower recognition rates in ADHD patients versus HC for all 
23 
emotions) as well as activations in bilateral posterior superior temporal gyrus/middle temporal gyrus 
24 
(STG/MTG) and right posterior thalamus (19). We specifically investigated whether lower recognition 
25 
rates of emotions in ADHD patients are accompanied by decreased functional activations in these 
26 
areas and to which extent activation in these areas correlates with behavior.   
27 
Journal Pre-proof
4 
 
 
28 
Material and methods 
29 
Participants 
30 
44 patients with ADHD of combined presentation (10 women, mean age ± standard deviation (SD) 
31 
30.0 ± 7.0 years) and 43 HC (18 women, 28.2 ± 6.5 years) were included. All participants were 
32 
German native speakers, right-handed (Edinburgh Handedness Inventory, 20), and had normal or 
33 
corrected to normal vision. The education was assessed in years not counting repetition of classes. 
34 
Stimulant medication (methylphenidate: 13 patients, atomoxetine: 2 patients, dexamphetamine: 1 
35 
patient) was discontinued for at least five half-life periods. None of the participants were treated with 
36 
any other psychotropic medication. Patients were recruited via the outpatient clinic of the University 
37 
Hospital for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy Tübingen. ADHD diagnosis was established on the basis of 
38 
a clinical interview by a trained psychiatrist or psychologist assessing DSM-V diagnostic criteria for 
39 
the combined presentation in adults and the self-report questionnaires ADHS-SB (“ADHS-
40 
Selbstbeurteilungsskala”, 21) and WURS-K (“Wender-Utah-Rating-Scale-Kurzform“, 22) as well as 
41 
third-party anamnesis on childhood symptoms. HC were included if they were never diagnosed with 
42 
or suspected to suffer from ADHD and were clearly below the diagnostic threshold of any present or 
43 
childhood ADHD subtype (< 90% of the clinical threshold obtained via questionnaires). Verbal 
44 
intelligence was assessed using the Mehrfachwortschatztest (MWT-B, Multiple-Choice Vocabulary 
45 
Intelligence Test, 23). None of the participants suffered from major depression or any other current 
46 
serious psychiatric condition including drug use, as determined by the German Version of the 
47 
Structured Clinical Interview (SKID-I, 24). To exclude autistic symptoms all participants completed 
48 
the Adult Asperger Assessment, 25). Depressive symptoms were captured with the BDI-II (“Beck 
49 
Depression Inventory”, 26). The study was performed according to the Code of Ethics of the World 
50 
Medical Association (Declaration of Helsinki) and the protocol was approved by the ethics committee 
51 
of the medical faculty of the Eberhard-Karls-University Tübingen. All participants gave written 
52 
informed consent prior to participating. 
53 
 
54 
Stimulus material and experimental design 
55 
Journal Pre-proof
5 
 
The stimuli were created with the help of professional actors who were videotaped while speaking 
56 
single German words in a neutral, angry, disgusted, happy, or seductive tone of voice with a congruent 
57 
facial expression (for more details, see 11). The stimuli were evaluated by an independent group of 31 
58 
healthy participants (mean age: 27.3 ± 6.0 years, 16 females). Based on this evaluation we selected the 
59 
stimuli to guarantee that they are well recognized (minimum recognition rate for each stimulus: 80%) 
60 
and that recognition rates during audiovisual presentation are balanced across emotions (mean 
61 
recognition rates: neutral = 93.4%, happy = 95.1%, seductive = 94.1%, angry = 95.1%, disgusted = 
62 
95.2%). During three fMRI sessions these stimuli were presented as audiovisual color videos (AV), 
63 
mute color videos (V), or auditory sound sequences (A) without visual presentation (60 stimuli per 
64 
modality). During each of the three fMRI sessions 20 stimuli per modality were presented. Participants 
65 
indicated the expressed emotion on a 5-point circular scale with the German words for “happiness”; 
66 
“eroticism”, “neutral”, “anger”, and “disgust”. The word “neutral” was placed on top of the circle 
67 
whereas the two positive connoted expressions “eroticism” and “happiness” where shown on one side 
68 
and the negative connoted emotions on the other side. To avoid possible laterality effects, the scale 
69 
was flipped horizontally for half of the participants of both groups. A white dot was randomly placed 
70 
at one of the five categories and participants had 6 s to choose the response which was fitting best to 
71 
the expressed affect by moving the white dot clockwise by a button of the response device (see Fig. 1). 
72 
This design was previously evaluated for application in fMRI studies targeting audiovisual integration 
73 
(19) and was chosen to remove potential biases from spatial arrangement of response alternatives. 
74 
While this design effectively removes any association between the number of motor responses and a 
75 
given category it does not allow to determine omission errors as the randomly chosen starting point of 
76 
the white dot might already correspond to the category which the participant judges as fitting best to 
77 
the presented stimulus (and thus this trial requires no response). The number of trials without motor 
78 
responses was comparable across the two groups (ADHD: 22.8 ± 1.5, HC: 24.4 ± 1.5, p = 0.22) 
79 
indicating that there was no systematic bias due to inattention.  
80 
The order of the stimuli within the three imaging sessions was randomized. Stimulus onset occurred 
81 
on average every 10.5 s (range: 9.0 - 12.0 s) and was jittered in TR/4 with a fixation cross presented in 
82 
between stimulus presentation. Stimulus presentation and response recording relied on Presentation 
83 
Journal Pre-proof
6 
 
software (Neurobehavioral Systems, www.neurobs.com). A screen was placed at the head end of the 
84 
MRI scanner, visible for participants through a mirror attached in front of their eyes. Sound was 
85 
presented via MR-compatible headphones. Responses were conveyed using a fiber optic response 
86 
system (Celeritas Fiber Optic Button Response System, Psychology Software Tools). 
87 
 
88 
Analysis of behavioral data  
89 
We evaluated emotion classification accuracy by determining unbiased hit rates (HU, 27) which were 
90 
obtained for each emotion by multiplying the simple hit rates with their respective positive predictive 
91 
value to incorporate both sensitivity and specificity of the responses. HU values were arcsine 
92 
transformed and then submitted to a repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with emotion 
93 
(neutral, happy, seductive, angry, disgusted) and modality (AV, V, A) as within-subject factor and 
94 
group (ADHD, HC) as between-subjects factor. Gender and BDI scores were included as covariates of 
95 
no interest. P-values were corrected for effects of non-sphericity (28). 
96 
 
97 
MRI data acquisition 
98 
Imaging was performed using a 3 Tesla scanner (Siemens PRISMA, Erlangen, Germany) and a 20 
99 
channel head coil. We acquired a high-resolution structural 3D magnetization prepared rapid 
100 
acquisition gradient echo (MPRAGE) T1-weighted scan (TR = 2.3 s, TE = 4.16 ms, TI = 0.9 s, flip 
101 
angle 9°, voxel size = 1x1x1 mm3), a fieldmap for image distortion correction (TR = 0.4 s, TE(1) = 
102 
5.19 ms, TE(2) = 7.65 ms, flip angle = 60°, voxel size = 3x3x3 mm3) and 441 functional images (72 
103 
transversal slices acquired interleaved, TR = 1.5 s, TE = 34 ms, flip angle = 70°, voxel size = 2x2x2 
104 
mm3, multiband acceleration factor 3).  
105 
 
106 
Analysis of fMRI data 
107 
FMRI data were analyzed with the statistical parametric mapping software (SPM12, Wellcome 
108 
Department of Imaging Neuroscience, London, UK, www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/software/spm12). 
109 
Preprocessing included realignment and unwarping to correct for movement as well as static and 
110 
Journal Pre-proof
7 
 
movement-dependent field distortions (29), coregistration to the anatomical image, normalization to 
111 
the standard space of the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI, resampled voxel size 2x2x2 mm) 
112 
based on the unified segmentation algorithm (30), and smoothing with an isotropic Gaussian filter of 5 
113 
mm full width at half maximum.  
114 
Statistical analysis relied on a general linear model (GLM, 31) with three regressors (A, V, and AV 
115 
trials) modelling presentation of the stimuli with a boxcar function of two seconds duration convolved 
116 
with the hemodynamic response function. A high-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 1/128 Hz 
117 
filtered out low-frequency components. The error term of the GLMs was modelled as a first-order 
118 
autoregressive process (AR coefficient = 0.2) plus white noise to account for serial autocorrelations.  
119 
Contrast images from the first-level GLMs were submitted to second-level random effects analyses. 
120 
Assignment of activation clusters relied on the automatic anatomical labelling tool (32). We used 
121 
conjunction analyses (33) to define areas for audiovisual integration (AV > V) ∩ (AV > A) using a 
122 
voxel-wise family-wise error (FWE) corrected height threshold of p < 0.05 and a cluster threshold of k 
123 
> 25 voxels. Based on previous research, the regions-of-interest (ROIs) defined by these second-level 
124 
conjunction analyses were expected to include audiovisual integration areas within bilateral 
125 
STG/MTG and right posterior thalamus (19).  Averaged responses of brain regions delineated by this 
126 
conjunction analysis were obtained for each subject and submitted to repeated-measures ANOVAs 
127 
with modality (AV, V, A) as within-subject factor and group (ADHD, HC) as between-subjects factor. 
128 
Please note that the ROIs were defined by a modality-dependent conjunction analysis and thus the 
129 
main effect of modality is inevitably significant and therefore only reported for the sake of 
130 
completeness. This is not the case for the main effect of group or the interaction between group and 
131 
modality as they are orthogonal to the definition of the ROIs on the basis of the conjunction analysis. 
132 
Gender and BDI scores were included as covariates of no interest. P-values were corrected for effects 
133 
of non-sphericity (28). We additionally investigated whether the ROIs exhibited a significant 
134 
correlation between activation and behavior (HU). 
135 
 
136 
Results 
137 
Demographic and psychometric data 
138 
Journal Pre-proof
8 
 
Demographic and psychometric data are presented in Table 1. There were no significant differences 
139 
between the two groups regarding age or educational level, but ADHD patients exhibited significantly 
140 
lower levels of verbal intelligence as measured by the MWT-B (p < 0.01).  As expected, significantly 
141 
higher levels of self-reported problems regarding inattention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity were 
142 
found regarding childhood (WURS-K) and present symptoms (ADHS-SB) in ADHD patients than HC 
143 
(both p < 0.001). Although none of the participants fulfilled the clinical criteria for a major depressive 
144 
disorder, ADHD patients exhibited significantly higher scores (p < 0.01) for depressive symptoms as 
145 
assessed by the BDI-II. 
146 
 
147 
Behavioral data 
148 
Mean HUs depending on the sensory modality and emotion are shown in Fig. 2 for ADHD patients 
149 
and HC (grey and white bars, respectively). The repeated-measures 5x3x2 ANOVA with emotion 
150 
(neutral, happy, seductive, angry, disgusted) and modality (AV, V, A) as within-subjects factor and 
151 
group (ADHD, HC) as between-subjects factor as well as gender and BDI scores as covariates of no 
152 
interest revealed a significant main effect of emotion (F(4, 328) = 6.56, p < 0.001), modality (F(2, 
153 
164) = 31.75, p < 0.001), and  group (F(1, 82) = 4.65, p < 0.05). The main effect of emotion was due 
154 
to the fact that HUs (averaged across modalities and groups) were significantly higher (all T(86) > 
155 
4.54, all p < 0.001) for stimuli expressing happiness (70 ± 1 %) and seduction (70 ± 2%) than anger 
156 
(62 ± 1 %), disgust (65 ± 1 %), or neutrality (64 ± 1 %).  The main effect of modality was due to 
157 
higher HUs (averaged across emotions and groups) for AV stimuli (82 ± 1%) than V stimuli (69 ± 1%) 
158 
and A stimuli (47 ± 1%). All statistical comparisons across the three modalities were significant (all 
159 
T(86) > 11.57, all p < 0.001). The main effect of group was driven by significantly (T(85) = 2.49, p < 
160 
0.05) lower HUs (averaged across emotions and modalities) in ADHD patients (64 ± 1%) than HC (69 
161 
± 2%). There was a significant interaction between emotion and modality (F(8, 656) = 4.54, p < 
162 
0.001). This interaction reflected significantly higher HUs (averaged across groups) for AV and V 
163 
stimuli expressing happiness than the other four categories (all T(85) > 2.55, all p < 0.05) while 
164 
seduction was significantly better recognized than the other four categories for A stimuli (all T(85) > 
165 
10.4, all p < 0.001). None of the interactions including the factor group were significant. 
166 
Journal Pre-proof
9 
 
 
167 
fMRI data 
168 
In agreement with our a priori hypothesis, the conjunction analysis revealed significant activations in 
169 
bilateral STG/MTG and right posterior thalamus. In addition, bilateral hippocampus/amygdala, medial 
170 
superior frontal gyrus (SFG), precuneus, and gyrus rectus as well as right temporal pole were 
171 
identified in this analysis (see Fig. 3 and Table 2). 
172 
The repeated-measures 2x3 ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of modality (all F(2, 162) > 
173 
4.68, all p < 0.05) in all ROIs which is to be expected as the ROIs were defined by a modality-specific 
174 
effect. A significant main effect of group was only found in right STG/MTG (F(1, 81) = 6.34, p < 
175 
0.05) and right thalamus (F(1, 81) = 4.79, p < 0.05) which was due to lower activation in ADHD 
176 
patients than HC (see Fig. 2, all T(84) > 3.30, all p < 0.05). None of the other brain areas delineated by 
177 
the conjunction analysis exhibited a significant main effect of group (all F(1, 81) < 1.32, all p > 0.38). 
178 
There was no interaction between modality and group in any of the ROIs (all F(2, 162) < 2.41, all p > 
179 
0.13). The only brain area which showed a significant correlation between activation and Hus was the 
180 
right STG/MTG. In this brain area, the correlation between activation (beta estimates) and HUs was r 
181 
= 0.18 for AV and V trials as well as r = 0.22 for A trials (all p < 0.05). Separate analyses for ADHD 
182 
patients and HC revealed that these correlations are mostly driven by the control group for AV trials 
183 
(HC: r = 0.38, ADHD: r = -0.07) and A trials (HC: r = 0.28 and ADHD: r = 0.09). For V trials similar 
184 
correlation coefficients were observed in both groups (HC: r = 0.16, ADHD: r = 0.14).   
185 
 
186

## References
References 
1. 
Faraone SV, Asherson P, Banaschewski T, Biederman J, Buitelaar JK, Ramos-
305 
Quiroga JA, et al. (2015): Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 
306 
1:15020. 
307 
2. 
Asherson P, Buitelaar J, Faraone SV, Rohde LA (2016): Adult attention-deficit 
308 
hyperactivity disorder: key conceptual issues. Lancet Psychiatry. 3:568-578. 
309 
3. 
Nijmeijer JS, Minderaa RB, Buitelaar JK, Mulligan A, Hartman CA, Hoekstra PJ 
310 
(2008): Attention-deficit/hyperactiv...
---
