---
# duggan2016
**Autores**: Not specified
**Año**: 2016
**Journal**: Scientific Paper
**DOI/Link**: N/A

## Abstract
Abstract
Ecologically valid indicators of executive functions are designed to capture dysfunction not easily measured in a lab 
setting. Here, we present two studies on the development and validity analyses of a behavioral screener for executive 
functions among young adults. In Study 1, we derived a four-factor (problem solving, attentional control, behavioral 
control, and emotional control) behavioral screener using a sample of 765 individuals. We used invariance analyses to 
evaluate the screener’s measurement reliability across sex. In Study 2, we replicated the screener derivation analyses 
using an independent sample of 197 undergraduates. To further examine the screener’s validity, we evaluated it against a 
well-known executive functions rating scale. The four-factor model was supported in both samples and analyses provided 
support for this screener as a valid and reliable measure for everyday executive functions among young adults.
Keywords
executive function, behavior rating scale, confirmatory factor analysis, convergent validity, invariance analysis
2	
Assessment ﻿
more ecologically valid way. One approach involves the use 
of ecologically based tests, such as the Multiple Errands Test 
(Shallice & Burgess, 1991) or the Behavioural Assessment 
of the Dysexecutive Syndrome (Wilson, Alderman, Burgess, 
Emslie, & Evans, 1996) that require an individual to interact 
directly with a given situational context. These instruments 
offer numerous advantages including eliciting practical, 
environmentally driven information helpful for improved 
diagnostics, predicting real-world performance, and treat-
ment planning. However, current measures also have sub-
stantial limitations, particularly with regard to norms, 
administration demands, test sensitivity, and they have gen-
erally been developed for the assessment of older individu-
als and clinical populations (cf. Burgess et  al., 2006; 
Manchester, Priestley, & Jackson, 2004; Müller & Kerns, 
2015; Wilson et al., 1996).
A second approach has been to gather information 
directly as it pertains to an individual’s everyday experi-
ences through executive functions behavioral rating scales 
(Isquith, Roth, & Gioia, 2013; Meltzer & Krishnan, 2007; 
Silver, 2014). Although rating scales were initially intended 
to complement performance-based tests, recent research 
indicates rating scales have their own value, providing 
unique, but complementary and corroborative information 
about different aspects of executive functions as they per-
tain to an individual’s everyday experience (Isquith et al., 
2013; McAuley, Chen, Goos, Schachar, & Crosbie, 2010; 
Silver, 2014; Toplak, West, & Stanovich, 2013). Executive 
functions rating scales are in their early development com-
pared with other neuropsychological assessment measures, 
having only gained research support and considered as an 
integral component of executive functions assessment 
within the past decade (Gioia, Kenworthy, & Isquith, 2010; 
Silver, 2014). Despite this support, assessment of executive 
functions via rating scales is still associated with a number 
of challenges including individual bias, personal and cogni-
tive characteristics of raters, environmental influences 
affecting ratings, the operationalization of the construct, 
and difficulty in parsing out specific executive functions 
deficits (Gioia, Isquith, & Kenealy, 2008; Grace & Malloy, 
2001; Isquith et al., 2013). While some of these challenges 
are inherent to the rating scale approach, others may be 
more readily addressed and ameliorated (e.g., definition and 
operationalization of executive functions).
Despite considerable agreement on the general attributes 
of executive functions, there is no consensus on the compo-
nent structure of this construct (Goldstein, Naglieri, 
Princiotta, & Otero, 2015). One influential approach to this 
issue applied latent variable analysis to demonstrate both 
the integration (unity) and multidimensionality (diversity) 
of three components of executive functions: inhibitory con-
trol, updating working memory, and mental shifting 
(Miyake et al., 2000). This seminal work has significantly 
informed our understanding of the nature of executive 
functions, and provided a key framework for subsequent 
research using an assessment approach based on computer-
based performance instruments (Frazer, 2012; Miyake & 
Friedman, 2012). Given the multidimensionality of execu-
tive functions, behavior rating scales of this construct 
should capture: (a) the diversity of its interrelated functions; 
(b) the unity of these interactions—organizing, controlling, 
and directing cognitive activity, behavior, and emotional 
responses; and (c) the environmental context of everyday 
life (Gioia et al., 2008; Roth, Isquith, & Gioia, 2015).
A number of instruments are now available for the 
behavioral assessment of executive functions; however, dif-
ferent definitions and approaches underlie their develop-
ment and rating scales vary in the number of factors they 
purportedly measure (Garcia-Barrera et  al., 2013). 
Furthermore, to our knowledge, there is currently no mea-
sure specifically developed for the assessment of executive 
functions in the midadolescence to early-adulthood period. 
Instead, scales appear to have been developed for age 
groups either in the preschool to late adolescence range 
(2-18 years old) or in the whole adulthood range (18-90 
years), but not specifically for the age period from 18 to 25 
years (emerging adulthood), an important period for the 
assessment executive functions (Reynolds & MacNeill 
Horton, 2008). It is worth noting that while these scales 
typically provide norms for the emerging adulthood age 
group, their item content does generally not capture charac-
teristics uniquely associated with this period (Naglieri & 
Goldstein, 2015a, 2015b). Age-appropriate items would 
probe for behaviors such as increased novelty and sensation 
seeking, social exploration, and risk taking (Crews, He, & 
Hodge, 2007; Naglieri & Goldstein, 2015a, 2015b), envi-
ronmental factors such as educational attainment and 
increased risk for substance abuse (Blakemore & 
Choudhury, 2006; Crews et al., 2007), and clinical factors 
such as the emergence of psychopathologies associated 
with executive impairments (e.g., schizophrenia, obses-
sive–compulsive disorder; Hersen & Beidel, 2012).
One approach to address some of these issues, proposed 
by Garcia-Barrera, Kamphaus, and Bandalos (2011), con-
sists in the development of a behavioral screener for the 
assessment of executive functions derived from the 
Behavioral Assessment System for Children (BASC; 
Reynolds & Kamphaus, 1992). The BASC, now in its third 
edition (BASC-3; Reynolds & Kamphaus, 2015), is a mul-
tidimensional broadband rating scale designed for the 
assessment of the behaviors and self-perceptions of pre-
schoolers (ages 2-5), children (ages 6-11), adolescents (ages 
12-21), and college students (ages 18-25). Garcia-Barrera 
et  al. (2011) originally developed their BASC executive 
functions screener by selecting 25 items from the BASC 
Teacher Ratings Scale–Child (BASC-TRS-C) form that 
were related to four executive factors: Problem Solving, 
Attentional Control, Behavioral Control, and Emotional 
Duggan et al.	
3
Control. The Problem Solving factor refers to “the ability to 
plan, problem-solve, make decisions, and organize infor-
mation towards the execution of a goal,” and it includes 
eight items (Cronbach’s α = .805; Garcia-Barrera et  al., 
2011, p. 67). The Attentional Control factor refers to “the 
ability to focus, sustain, and shift attention systems accord-
ing to task demands” (p. 67), and it includes seven items (α 
= .890). The Behavioral Control factor refers to the self-
regulation of behavior, including inhibition/impulse con-
trol, and it includes six items (α = .842). Finally, the 
Emotional Control factor refers to “the ability to self-regu-
late emotional response to environmental and internal cues” 
(p. 68), and it includes five items (α = .845).
This multidimensional model demonstrated adequate fit 
over and beyond a unidimensional model and invariance for 
two age groups (6-8 years vs. 9-11 years) and sex (Garcia-
Barrera et al., 2011). A number of subsequent studies have 
replicated the derivation of this behavioral screener for 
executive functions, providing support for its reliability and 
validity. Specifically, Garcia-Barrera et al. (2013) were able 
to replicate the screener and provided evidence for its mea-
surement reliability across time using longitudinal invari-
ance analyses and latent growth modeling in a large sample 
of children (N = 1,237). Sadeh, Burns, and Sullivan (2012) 
independently showed that the four-factor model had ade-
quate fit in a sample of kindergarteners at risk for develop-
ing behavior disorders (N = 220). Empirical support has 
also been provided for the use of this instrument in pre-
schoolers (Karr et al., 2013), and in clinical and cross-cul-
tural samples (i.e., attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, 
Colombian 
children; 
Garcia-Barrera, 
Karr, 
Duran, 
Direnfeld, & Pineda, 2015). Garcia-Barrera et al.’s (2011) 
multidimensional model may offer an effective and practi-
cal method for the screening of executive functions. Further 
research, however, is needed to replicate and evaluate this 
instrument in adolescents and young adults. Additionally, 
prior studies have not examined how this instrument com-
pares with other executive functions behavioral rating 
scales; therefore, analysis of its convergent validity is nec-
essary to better understand its potential utility.
The BASC Second Edition Self-Report of Personality–
College (BASC-2-SRP-COL) form contains 185 items, 68 
of which consist of dichotomous (true/false) items, and 117 
items to be rated on a 4-point Likert-type scale (Reynolds & 
Kamphaus, 2004). While most other ratings scales for indi-
viduals ages 18 to 25 are designed for use in all adults (e.g., 
18-90 years), the items on the BASC-2-SRP-COL are spe-
cifically designed to capture many behavioral, emotional, 
self-concept formation issues that are specific to this devel-
opmental period (representing the transition from adoles-
cence into early adulthood) and are highly relevant to 
normative executive functions (Reynolds & Kamphaus, 
2004). Given the support for Garcia-Barrera et al.’s (2011) 
four-factor model (as derived from other forms of the 
BASC), a similar screener derived from the BASC-2-SRP-
COL may serve as an effective executive functions measure 
for young adults.
Considering the variability of executive functions struc-
tures reported across ages and the absence of rating scales 
with content specifically designed to capture the unique 
factors critical to emerging adulthood, we were led to the 
present article. We present two studies that were aimed at 
developing and examining the reliability and validity of an 
executive functions ratings scale for young adults.
Study 1: Derivation of the Executive 
Functions Screener
The main objectives of Study 1 were to answer the follow-
ing questions: Can an executive functions screener for 
young adults be derived from the BASC-2-SRP-COL using 
the

## Key Findings
Discussion
We successfully derived an executive functions screener 
from the BASC-2-SRP-COL. While the Attentional Control 
factor was the only factor that did not represent a diversity 
of original BASC scales, only items considered as latent 
indicators of Attentional Control (and not simply 
“Attentional Problems” as indicated by the original BASC 
scale) were included. Overall, each factor (Problem Solving, 
Attentional Control, Behavioral Control, and Emotional 
Control) consisted of a diverse, yet parsimonious set of 
items that captured both the essence and the complexity 
each construct is theorized to represent. While the internal 
consistency reliabilities fell below those reported on previ-
ous studies of the executive functions screener using differ-
ent versions of BASC (Garcia-Barrera et al., 2011, 2013; 
Sadeh et al., 2012), they all still fall in the acceptable range. 
Additionally, it is worth noting that the BASC-2-SRP-COL 
is unique in its inclusion of items with dic... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
methods previously applied in the derivation of differ-
ent versions of the BASC for younger populations? What 
are the statistical properties of the BASC-2-SRP-COL 
executive functions screener? What model best describes 
the data (e.g., a unidimensional model or a multidimen-
sional model)?
Given that previous studies successfully derived an 
executive functions screener with other versions of the 
BASC (Garcia-Barrera et al., 2011, 2013, 2015; Karr et al., 
2013; Sadeh et al., 2012), we anticipated we would also be 
able to derive the target instrument in this study. In evaluat-
ing the statistical properties of the derived screener, we 
aimed to determine which factor structure best explained 
the data. Based on previous research with the BASC execu-
tive functions screener, we hypothesized that a four-factor 
model would provide the best fit to the data and yield an 
instrument with the strongest statistical properties.
A further goal of Study 1 was to examine whether the 
BASC executive functions screener measures executive 
behavior in the same way across sex. While this instrument 
has shown measurement invariance for sex in 6- to 11-year-
olds (Garcia-Barrera et al., 2011, 2013, 2015), research has 
not clearly established whether this measurement invari-
ance is sustained across ages on this or other executive 
functions rating scales. For example, significant sex differ-
ences were found on four out of five scales on the Barkley 
Deficits in Executive Functioning Scale for Children and 
Adolescents (BDEFS-CA; ages 6-17), but only two of five 
scales on the BDEFS (ages 18-81; Barkley, 2015). Similarly, 
more sex differences were found on preschool, child, and 
adolescent versions of the Behavior Rating Inventory of 
Executive Function (BRIEF) than the adult versions; how-
ever, these findings also appeared to be influenced by the 
individual providing the ratings (e.g., self, parent, teacher) 
and the specific scale being examined (e.g., boys are typi-
cally rated to have greater problems on the Inhibit scale, but 
girls are typically rated to have more problems on the 
4	
Assessment ﻿
Emotional Control scale; Roth et al., 2015). Furthermore, 
the presence of sex differences across traditional perfor-
mance-based tasks of executive functions is widely variable 
(cf. Strauss, Sherman, & Spreen, 2006) and there is emerg-
ing evidence for sex differences in the development and 
function of neural structures theorized to support executive 
functions (Naglieri & Goldstein, 2015b). In Study 1, we 
assessed the screener’s measurement equivalence across 
sex by using configural, weak, and strong measurement 
invariance testing. Given prior research supporting sex 
measurement equivalence of executive function for other 
age groups, we hypothesized that our derived screener for 
college-aged 
students 
would 
demonstrate 
similar 
invariance.
Method
Participants.  We conducted the screener derivation process 
using the original BASC-2-SRP-COL standardization data-
base, provided with permission from Pearson Assessment 
(hereafter referred to as the derivation sample). This sample 
includes a diverse group of 765 individuals representative 
of the U.S. college-aged population. A summary of the deri-
vation sample’s demographic characteristics is provided in 
Table 1. Further information about this sample and the data 
collection procedures is found in the BASC-2 manual 
(Reynolds & Kamphaus, 2004). Use of these data was 
approved by the Human Research Ethics Board at the Uni-
versity of Victoria (Protocol Number 14-335).
Screener Derivation Process.  The entire set of 185 items from 
the BASC-2-SRP-COL was carefully reviewed and items 
potentially “executive” in nature were isolated. This desig-
nation was based on previous studies that had established 
the screener measures the following four executive func-
tions: problem solving, attentional control, behavioral con-
trol, and emotional control (Garcia-Barrera et  al., 2011, 
2013). Overall, 50 items were initially extracted, serving as 
latent indicators of the construct. It is important to note that, 
while large, this number reflects several sets of very similar 
or near-duplicate items (e.g., I have trouble paying attention 
to what I am doing and I have trouble paying attention to 
lectures), which were optimally refined during the item 
screening process (see below).
Item screening included tests for multivariate normality 
(Mahalanobis distance), analysis of frequency distributions, 
and examination of potential collinearity and item content 
(as described in Garcia-Barrera et al., 2011). Validity indi-
ces derived from the BASC (i.e., the F, V, and L indices) 
were also examined to screen for any potential problematic 
patterns of responding. Internal consistency reliabilities for 
each group of items (factors) were estimated using 
Cronbach’s α. In consideration of the complexity of the four 
executive functions factors, along with the small number of 
indicators being used to estimate each factor, internal con-
sistency reliability values greater than 0.6 were established 
as acceptable and values greater than 0.7 established as 
good (Hair, Black, Babin, & Anderson, 2010; Kline, 2013). 
Refining the remaining pool of items was guided by several 
principles typically used for reviewing item content and 
optimizing reliability coefficients. This included ensuring 
each factor consisted of a balanced set of items that capture 
both the underlying core construct, as well as the complex-
ity each construct is theorized to represent. Furthermore, 
when possible, items were to belong to different original 
scales of the BASC to ensure factors are not merely abbre-
viated BASC scales. All descriptive statistics, frequency 
distributions, correlations, tests for multivariate normality, 
Table 1.  Demographics.
Derivation sample
Replication sample
Replication BRIEF-A subsample
Sample size
765
197
97
Age (M ± SD in years)
20.57 + 1.61
20.46 ± 1.80
20.58 ± 1.81
Representation by developmental age (%)
  18
16.21
15.74
15.46
  19
27.19
18.78
15.46
  20
19.08
17.77
19.59
  21
17.78
20.81
18.56
  22
11.11
12.69
15.46
  23
5.49
7.11
8.25
  24
1.44
5.58
6.19
  25
1.70
1.52
1.03
Representation by sex (%)
  Female
56.60
79.19
73.20
  Male
43.40
20.81
26.80
Note. BRIEF-A = Behavior Rating Inventory of Executive Function–Adult version.
Duggan et al.	
5
and reliability coefficients were calculated using IBM SPSS 
Version 18.
Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was used to evaluate 
the a priori four-factor model of executive functions serving 
as the target model for this study (referred to as Model 4). 
This included both an evaluation of the model’s fit to the 
observed data, as well as an evaluation of the model in com-
parison with three alternative CFA models (referred to as 
Models 1-3; see Figure 1). The alternative CFA models 
were chosen based on the strongest theoretical variations 
consistent with the current conceptualization of executive 
functions, in consideration of the item content of the 
selected indicators, and in line with the alternative models 
evaluated by Garcia-Barrera et al. (2011). The first alterna-
tive model (Model 1) was a one-factor (unidimensional) 
model with 23 indicators. Since this model contained all of 
the isolated executive functions indicators (conceptualized 
as contributing to one unitary construct), the latent con-
struct was called Executive Function. The second alterna-
tive model (Model 2) was a two-factor model comprising a 
Problem Solving latent construct (6 items) and a behavioral 
self-regulation latent construct (17 items), which combines 
items originally comprising the Attentional Control, 
Behavioral Control, and Emotional Control factors. The 
third alternative model (Model 3) was a three-factor model, 
corresponding to three latent constructs: Problem Solving 
(6 items), Attentional Control (6 items), and Behavioral/
Emotional Control (11 items; formerly Behavioral Control 
and Emotional Control).
Model fit was evaluated using the χ2 test, the compara-
tive fit index (CFI), the Tucker–Lewis index (TLI), and the 
root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA). For 
this study, the cutoff criterion for all fit indices were set to 
those typically regarded as indicative of “good fit” (Hu & 
Bentler, 1999; Jackson, Gillaspy, & Purc-Stephenson, 2009; 
Marsh, Balla, & McDonald, 1988; Browne & Cudeck, 1993 
as cited in Schermelleh-Engel, Moosbrugger, & Müller, 
2003) and used in prior research with different derivations 
of the BASC screener (Garcia-Barrera et al., 2011, 2013). 
All analyses of factor structure and latent means were con-
ducted using Mplus Version 7.11 (Muthén & Muthén, 1998-
2012) using the specification for categorical data (which 
employs the weighted least squares with mean and variance 
adjusted estimator), and the missing completely at random 
assumption for each analysis.
Analyses of Measurement Invariance.  Once the screener was 
derived, we conducted a series of stepwise analyses to 
examine if this instrument had the same meaning across 
sex. Configural, metric, and scalar invariance tests were 
performed in accordance with methods previously described 
in the evaluation of a similar instrument for children (Gar-
cia-Barrera et al., 2013). The primary metrics selected for 
model comparison included Δχ2 and ΔCFI. Since using the 
χ2 metric can be problematic with nonnormal data, ΔCFI 
served as the primary difference testing metric, following 
the typically recommended cutoff of ≥.01 (Cheung & Rens-
vold, 2002; Yu, 2002).

## Results
Results
Data and Item Screening.  Inspection for multivariate normal-
ity revealed no significant outliers (α = .05) and review of 
the BASC validity indices did not indicate any cases for 
exclusion from further analyses. The preliminary pool of 50 
potential indicator items (14 Problem Solving items, 10 
Attentional Control items, 15 Behavioral Control items, 11 
Emotional Control items) was refined during item screening. 
Figure 1.  Construct validity analyses of the BASC-2-SRP-COL executive functions screener: Unidimensional and multidimensional 
models tested.
Note. BASC-2-SRP-COL = Behavior Assessment System for Children Second Edition Self-Report of Personality–College.
6	
Assessment ﻿
Four items exceeded the established skewness and kurtosis 
criteria and were removed (Items 42, 45, 54, and 58). Review 
of intra- and interfactor item correlations resulted in the 
removal of seven items due to poor correlations (Items 7, 49, 
120, 136, 149, 151, and 178; Supplemental Table S1 includes 
the final item correlation matrix [all supplemental materials 
are available online at http://asm.sagepub.com/content/by/
supplemental-data]). Finally, review of item content and 
optimizing reliability coefficients for each factor resulted in 
the removal of 15 items (Items 57, 66, 88, 98, 101, 102, 105, 
108, 109, 113, 117, 128, 129, 137, and 179). Table 2 sum-
marizes the final set of 23 items and their original BASC-2-
SRP-COL scale membership.
Internal Consistency Reliability.  The internal consistencies 
(Cronbach’s α) for the four executive functions factors were 
in the acceptable range. Specifically, the alpha coefficients 
were .704 for Problem Solving, .801 for Attentional Con-
trol, .658 for Behavioral Control, and .695 for Emotional 
Control. For the whole screener, an alpha coefficient of .843 
was obtained. Alpha coefficients did not improve with the 
deletion of any items; therefore, all items were retained.
Confirmatory Factor Analysis.  All models converged normally 
and the fit indexes for each are reported in Table 3. Overall, 
each model (Models 1-4) demonstrated increasingly better 
model fit in terms of all selected fit indicators. Progres-
sively lower (less inflated) χ2 values, improved (lower) 
RMSEA values, and larger CFI and TLI values were 
observed with each new model. Model 4 was the only 
model to demonstrate acceptable fit using these metrics (χ2 
= 886.708, RMSEA = 0.062, CFI = 0.912, TLI = 0.901).
Parameter Estimates.  Figure 2 represents the final model 
configuration (Model 4) and indicates the correlations 
among factors. The correlations ranged from .251 to .629, 
which are considered low to moderate. The individual item 
factor loadings for the final model configuration (Model 4) 
Table 2.  Distribution and Descriptive Statistics of the Final Set of BASC-2-SRP-COL Executive Function Items per Scale.
Item
Original scale membership
Derivation sample (N = 765)
Replication sample (N = 197)
M
SD
Skewness
Kurtosis
M
SD
Skewness
Kurtosis
Problem Solving
Item 56
Sense of inadequacy
0.26
0.44
1.10
−0.78
0.17
0.35
0.18
0.12
Item 87
Sense of inadequacy
0.60
0.62
0.69
0.35
1.51
0.68
1.26
1.53
Item 95
Test anxiety
1.33
0.82
−0.02
−0.63
2.12
0.65
0.00
−0.35
Item 107
Self-reliance
1.08
0.72
0.09
−0.56
2.20
0.71
−0.22
−0.84
Item 118
Sense of inadequacy, test 
anxiety
0.68
0.63
0.76
1.31
1.54
0.56
0.36
−0.89
Item 138
Self-reliance, ego–strength
1.22
0.76
0.24
−0.26
2.36
0.70
−0.16
−0.39
Attentional Control
Item 5
Attention problems
0.48
0.50
0.07
−2.00
0.40
0.49
0.41
−1.85
Item 36
Attention problems
0.27
0.44
1.06
−0.88
0.19
0.40
1.57
0.47
Item 67
Attention problems
0.36
0.48
0.59
−1.65
0.21
0.41
1.41
−0.01
Item 125
Attention problems
1.23
0.72
0.83
0.78
2.13
0.62
0.57
1.18
Item 148
Attention problems
0.49
0.65
1.17
1.03
1.37
0.50
0.80
−0.79
Item 160
Attention problems
0.91
0.67
0.74
1.49
1.77
0.54
0.08
0.88
Behavioral Control
Item 97
Hyperactivity
1.02
0.86
0.68
−0.03
1.73
0.80
0.94
0.37
Item 144
Hyperactivity, mania
1.21
0.67
0.52
0.57
2.19
0.70
0.44
0.38
Item 155
Mania
0.82
0.73
0.65
0.22
1.78
0.78
0.93
0.79
Item 159
Hyperactivity
0.86
0.57
0.20
0.91
1.75
0.56
0.35
1.55
Item 174
Mania
0.95
0.80
0.72
0.30
1.70
0.76
1.00
0.75
Item 175
Hyperactivity
0.60
0.75
1.13
0.81
1.44
0.63
1.36
1.91
Emotional Control
Item 16
Anxiety
0.27
0.44
1.05
−0.90
0.21
0.41
1.45
0.10
Item 47
Anxiety
0.50
0.50
0.02
−2.01
0.60
0.49
−0.43
−1.84
Item 126
Anxiety
1.29
0.76
0.56
0.15
2.36
0.73
0.36
−0.04
Item 156
Anger control
0.87
0.75
0.69
0.41
1.87
0.85
0.81
0.08
Item 171
Anxiety, anger control
1.16
0.72
0.43
0.24
2.25
0.68
0.72
0.79
Note. BASC-2-SRP-COL = Behavior Assessment System for Children Second Edition Self-Report of Personality–College.
Duggan et al.	
7
are summarized in Supplemental Table S2. The factor load-
ings for Model 4 ranged from .462 to .856 overall; .583 to 
.674 for Problem Solving (with 4/6 above |.60|), .687 to .856 
for Attentional Control (with 6/6 above |.60|), .462 to .769 
for Behavioral Control (with 1/6 above |.60|), and .630 to 
.712 for Emotional Control (with 5/5 above |.60|).
Analyses of Measurement Invariance.  Table 4 summarizes the 
results of the measurement invariance analyses across sex. The 
select fit indices (CFI, TLI, and RMSEA) all demonstrated 
adequate goodness of fit. Moving from the configural invari-
ance model to the weak invariance model resulted in a ΔCFI = 
−.013, while moving from the weak invariance model to the 
strong invariance model resulted in ΔCFI = +.003.
Summary and

## Clinical Significance
conclusion that executive 
functions “are important to about every aspect of life.” 
While researchers and clinicians acknowledge that early 
detection of executive functions impairments is crucial for 
successful treatment or remediation (Müller & Kerns, 2015; 
Torralva, Roca, Gleichgerrcht, Bekinschtein, & Manes, 
2009), effective detection of such disruption remains a sig-
nificant challenge in neuropsychology (Garcia-Barrera, 
Karr, & Kamphaus, 2013; Gioia & Isquith, 2004).
Currently, three general approaches are available for the 
assessment of executive functions: laboratory-based perfor-
mance tests, ecologically based tests, and rating scales. 
Laboratory-based tests have served as the traditional method 
for assessing executive functions. While these tests have 
numerous advantages, they are not always sensitive to 
everyday manifestations of executive dysfunction outside 
the test setting, or they sometimes indicate executive impair-
ments in individuals not demonstrating any day-to-day func-
tional difficulties (Pennington & Ozonoff, 1996). In response 
to the limitations of traditional approaches, researchers have 
developed two alternative approaches designed to capture 
everyday executive functions (i.e., executive behavior) in a 
670511 ASMXXX10.1177/1073191116670511AssessmentDuggan et al.
research-article2016
1University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada
Corresponding Author:
Emily C. Duggan, Department of Psychology, University of Victoria, PO 
Box 1700 STN CSC, Victoria, British Columbia V8W 2Y2, Canada. 
Email: eduggan@uvic.ca
Derivation, Replication, and Validity 
Analyses of a Screener for the Behavioral 
Assessment of Executive Functions in  
Young Adults
Emily C. Duggan1, Mauricio A. Garcia-Barrera1, and Ulrich Müller1

## References
References
Anderson, V., Anderson, P. J., Jacobs, R., & Spencer Smith, M. 
(2008). Development and assessment of executive function: 
From preschool to adolescence. In V. Anderson, R. Jacobs 
& P. J. Anderson (Eds.), Executive functions and the frontal 
lobes: A lifespan perspective (pp. 123-154). New York, NY: 
Taylor & Francis.
Baars, M. A. E., Bijvank, M. N., Tonnaer, G. H., & Jolles, J. 
(2015). Self-report measures of executive functioning are a 
determinant of academic performance in first...
---
