---
# ijtd_226.fm
**Autores**: jim
**Año**: 2005
**Journal**: Scientific Paper
**DOI/Link**: N/A

## Abstract
Not found

## Key Findings
discussion with others, thereby avoiding a potential source of contamination
(Saunders 
 
et al.
 
, 2003).
Given the focus on application of learning, the triangulation of self-scores was also
important. Between two and seven months later, participants were contacted again to
complete their follow-up scores. Originally, the intention was to have a consistent
three-month gap, long enough for learning and implementation to occur, but short
enough to reduce the risk of people changing job. However, one organisation required
the analysed results at an earlier stage to show at a sales conference, another
announced a major reorganisation the day after the course and wished to delay
evaluations, whilst various other operational reasons caused further irregular rather
than regular data capture. This was not felt to be a critical factor as there was no
unanimity in the existing literature of a ‘best’ time interval. For instance, Orpen (1993)
 
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005.
 
Does time mana... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
Methodology
 
Notwithstanding the difﬁculties involved, as Campbell (1998) argues, it is not only
important to plan and deliver training programmes carefully, but also to determine
 
128
 
International Journal of Training and Development 
 
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005.
 
their relevance and effectiveness, while Van der Klink 
 
et al.
 
 (2001) note that the lack of
transfer from the training situation into the workplace is a key issue on the HRD
research agenda. Researchers and trainers alike generally recognise that evaluation is
an important part of the training system. However, although a great deal of informa-
tion exists regarding various designs, application still lags behind (Geertshuis 
 
et al.
 
,
2002). Despite the criticisms and limitations of Kirkpatrick’s model, it remains the most
popular approach to training evaluation (Phillips & Phillips, 2001). Indeed, Kearns
(1995, p. 38) comments that whilst there have been several variations and adaptations
of Kirkpatrick’s four-level model, none have ‘made any signiﬁcant improvement or
conceptual breakthrough from the original’. ‘The power of Kirkpatrick’s model is its
simplicity and its ability to help people think about training evaluations’ (Alliger &
Janak, 1989) for, as Geertshuis 
 
et al.
 
 (2002) acknowledge, in the practice of training
evaluation the constraints of time and ﬁnance often outweigh considerations of theo-
retical validity and professionals within organisations may not know how to apply
complex techniques. The reality is that the majority of evaluation that does take place
addresses Kirkpatrick’s level 1 (reaction) and level 2 (learning) but neglects the transfer
of that learning to the workplace and its effect. Yet, as Mumford (1995) observes, the
purpose behind management development is to achieve effective management behav-
iour while Yamnill and McLean (2001) state that training is useless if it cannot be
translated into performance.
A major drawback of the hierarchical nature of Kirkpatrick’s model is the implica-
tion that the top evaluation outcome every time is Level 4 (results), meaning some
form of demonstrable organisational improvement. This is the so-called ‘dollar crite-
rion’ (Brogden & Taylor, 1950), an approach promoted by sections of the literature as
a means of increasing the perceived image and contribution of the HR or training
function to an organisation (Jackson, 1989; Kearns, 1995; Phillips, 1991; Swanson, 2001).
In adding a ﬁfth level of evaluation Phillips expanded Kirkpatrick’s framework to
include the return on investment (ROI), the conversion of beneﬁts to monetary value
which can then be compared to the fully loaded costs of the training (Phillips &
Phillips, 2001). However, Phillips and Phillips (2001, p. 242) also note that it is not
always appropriate to evaluate at the fourth and ﬁfth levels as ROI is often ‘charac-
terised as a difﬁcult and expensive process’. For the average practitioner the identiﬁ-
cation of direct causal links in terms of impact on the organisation’s ‘bottom line’ is
often perceived as problematic, complex and daunting, particularly in relation to the
development of soft skills and can act as a signiﬁcant barrier to evaluation beyond the
reaction level (Skinner, 2004).
The idea of assessing changes in behaviour (Kirkpatrick level 3) is far more acces-
sible. Thus the research project reported here sought not only to assess the effectiveness
of the time management training in terms of changing behaviour but also to do so by
designing a process that would facilitate such an assessment. Given the limitations of
previous approaches as described above, an adaptable surrogate measurement instru-
ment, the  Key  Skills  Questionnaire  (KSQ),  was  developed  linked  to  a checklist of
key time management skills used in the main course workbook (Green, 1999). The
KSQ was designed, tested and adapted for use with ﬁve types of time management
training on 20 courses, including public, private, charity, in-company and open courses
(Table 1).
The time management training measured here ﬁts Covey 
 
et al.
 
’s (1994) classiﬁcation
of fourth generation. Reﬂecting this, unlike earlier instruments, the KSQ used mea-
sures deﬁned at the construct conceptual level rather than the construct operational
level with the aim of capturing the essence of the key ideas. Participants were asked
to rate their time management skills against the key principles covered by the time
management training. These included the ability to plan, prioritise and schedule each
day, spend more time on the important rather than the urgent, manage interruptions,
link medium-term plans to daily plans, set and achieve clear objectives, use lists to
reduce forgetfulness, to say ‘no’ in a non-career threatening way, procrastinate less,
decide what is personally important, improve the work/life balance and inﬂuence the
organisation’s time culture.
 
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005.
 
Does time management training work? An evaluation
 
129
 
Table 1: Course summary
 
Organisation
Course (with personal organiser)
Dur.
Nos.
T1
T2
T0
Void
Police trainers and manager
Time management
1 day
18
18
Police IT support team & mgr
Time management
1 day
20
17
3
Fmcg* sales managers
Sales time management
1 day
13
5
7
1
Fmcg sales team – North
Sales time management
1 day
11
2
9
Fmcg sales team – West
Sales time management
1 day
12
4
6
2
Fmcg sales team – Midlands
Sales time management
1 day
12
6
4
2
Fmcg sales team – South
Sales time management
1 day
12
4
5
2
1
Open course – marketing bias
Time management
1 day
11
4
7
Open course – marketing bias
Time management
1 day
4
3
1
Open course – mixed functions
Time management
1 day
9
6
2
1
Course (without personal organiser)
Regional development agency
Time management
1 day
7
7
Motor manufacturer
Time management
1 day
8
8
International ﬁnancial services
Time management
1 day
6
6
IT consultancy
Time management
2 day
8
8
Charity IT support team (ofﬁce/ﬁeld)
Managing priorities
2.5 hrs
22
11
11
Pharmaceuticals – mixed functions
Time tips
1.5 hrs
17
9
8
Local authority senior management
Exec time management
1 day
6
5
1
Pharmaceuticals – new R&D team
Time management
1 day
15
8
7
Pharmaceuticals – mixed functions
Time tips
1.5 hrs
14
6
8
Local authority department team
Exec time management
1 day
8
8
Totals
233
68
134
27
4
 
Key:
Dur.:
 
 Duration of course
 
Tr.:
 
 Trainer (A 
 
=
 
 researcher, B 
 
=
 
 associate)
 
Nos.:
 
 Number of course attendees
 
T1:
 
 End of course self-scores only
 
T2:
 
 Longitudinal self-scores
 
T0:
 
 No self-scores
 
Org.:
 
 Filofax organiser included
* Fmcg = fast-moving consumer goods
 
130
 
International Journal of Training and Development 
 
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005.
 
The instrument was pilot-tested by a trainer with four clients in different business
sectors. The purpose of the pilot was to ensure there were no problems in answering
the questions and to obtain an initial assessment of the validity of the questions and
reliability of the data (Bell, 1999; Saunders 
 
et al.
 
, 2003). The results were therefore
analysed and discussed with the client organisations. From this it was evident that the
questions were understood, requiring no rewording and the data produced made
sense, thereby supporting its content validity (Mitchell, 1996).
In order to overcome some of the limitations of previous research already noted,
this research combined quantitative and qualitative data collection over time (between
two and seven months) in a variety of organisational settings. It involved ﬁve training
providers and two trainers, one of whom was also the researcher. Participants ranged
from chief executives to secretaries, with a common denominator of a responsible
position with some level of discretion in time usage. Courses varied from two days to
two hours and some included the use of a personal organiser. As the sample reﬂected
the wide range of industries and course variations faced by training providers in a
typical year, it was representative and can best be described as purposive, of the
heterogeneous type (Saunders 
 
et al.
 
, 2003). A total of 232 participants rated their time
management skills after the training and 134 also rated it between two and seven
months later, depending on the organisation. Managers gave second opinions on 75
of those who had taken part in the re-rating with a 95% agreement on the ﬁgures.
Semi-structured interviews with managers of 42 of the 134 were used to triangulate
data.
An important consideration in encouraging evaluation was the need to design an
instrument that was easy and quick to complete while relatively comprehensive in
coverage. Whilst the standard instrument was used on eleven open and in-company
courses, it was sufﬁciently robust to deal with slightly varying training needs in the
other nine courses evaluated. For instance, managing interruptions and delegation
were  not  relevant  in  the  ﬁve  sales  courses,  whereas  planning  economical  journeys
and achieving monthly objectives were. On the three short courses, the KSQ reﬂected
the more limited objectives and content. This resulted in a range of seven to ﬁfteen
measures, according to the speciﬁc needs and duration of the course. It is argued that
adapting the instrument to meet the speciﬁc training needs of the organisation and to
thereby ‘expose itself to the vagaries of the organizational context’, as encouraged by
Dionne (1996, p. 282), produces more meaningful results than a prescriptive ‘one-size-
ﬁts-all’ approach.
At the end of each course, participants were invited, on a voluntary basis, to com-
plete a KSQ. Each of the questionnaires used a seven-point numerical response format,
with 1 representing low or poor and 7 high or good. Although a number of authors
advocate the importance of pre-course testing for comparative purposes (for example
Warr 
 
et al.
 
, 1999) the decision was taken that participants should complete their KSQs
at the end of the course rather than in advance, for as Wiltsher (1999, p. 190) observes,
‘we do not know what we don’t know! In other words we are unconsciously incom-
petent.’ By exposing people to the course content ﬁrst, it was felt that they were more
likely to become consciously incompetent and therefore be more accurate in their self-
scoring.  It  also  ensured  that  participants  completed  them  individually,  rather  than
in

## Results
results of a longitudinal
and triangulated evaluation of time management training
undertaken in a variety of organisational settings, which
sought  to  establish  whether  the  training  was  effective,  not
only  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  participants,  but  also  from
the  perspective  of  their  managers.  The  evidence,  collected
using quantitative and qualitative approaches, suggests that
although such training is affected by context and motivation,
it does have a positive impact for the majority of participants.
 
Introduction
 
In an increasingly competitive business environment, organisations have sought to
increase productivity and reduce costs. In response to these pressures ‘downsizing has
spread like a contagion’ (Hutton, 1997, p. 40) and ‘organisations have been stripped
to the core and resources are limited’ (Mann, 2002, p. 29). The consequences for the
 
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005.
 
Does time management training work? An evaluation
 
125
surviving workforce include increased workloads, greater time pressures and longer
hours (Noon, 1998). In the UK the longer hours phenomenon continues to affect
increasing numbers among the workforce, a trend illustrated by a rise in the pro-
portion working more than 60 hours from 11% in 2000 to 16% in 2002 (Daykin &
Baldwinson, 2002; DfEE, 2000).
Yet, a long hours culture ‘results in stress and reduced effectiveness’ (DTI, 2001: 4),
making people feel less able to cope and to control their workloads, their time and
their lives (Noon, 1998; Richards, 1987). The cost of all this to individuals is impaired
health,  damaged  relationships  and  poor  quality  of  life  (Davis,  1999;  DTI,  2001;
Roger, 2002). The cost to organisations is alarming. For instance, stress is said to be
undermining performance in 90% of UK companies (Industrial Society, 1997), costing
industry £5 billion annually (Conran, 2002) and causing 13 million days sick leave in
2001–02 (Roberts, 2003). In addition to the costs of stress, absence and related high
labour turnover, many organisations suffer what Noon (1998, p. 13) describes as the
‘corrosive effects of delay.’ Such delays result in missed deadlines or poor quality
work, with potential costs to the organisation in relation to customer service, image
and competitiveness.
The need to ‘work smarter, not harder’ (Lakein, 1973, p. vii) is offered as the
apparent solution to these increased pressures caused by a climate where ‘more has
to be done and it has to be done now’ (Higgs, 2003, p. 15). An important factor in the
ability to ‘work smarter’ is argued to be the ability of an individual to manage their
time effectively. The Management Standards of the UK Management Charter Initiative
(MCI, 1997, p. 40), for example, include the ability to ‘manage your own time and
resources to meet your objectives’ whilst an Industrial Society survey (Garnett, 1993)
estimated that ineffective use of time was wasting 20% of UK plc’s management costs.
Time management training appears to offer an obvious solution, yet there are siren
voices. Drucker (1977) warns against claims of time management panaceas, Covey
 
et al.
 
 (1994), and Noon (1998) believe that many earlier forms of time management
training do not work, whilst Slaven and Totterdell (1993) and Macan (1996) assert that
there is little convincing empirical evidence of the effectiveness of time management
training.
This paper reports the results of a longitudinal and triangulated evaluation of time
management training undertaken in a variety of organisational settings which sought
to establish whether the training was effective, not only in the view of participants,
but also from the perspective of their managers. Effective in this context is deﬁned as
the ability to apply the training and achieve improvement in areas such as work/life
balance, prioritising, and the achievement of objectives. In Kirkpatrick’s (1994) terms,
a level three evaluation of whether the knowledge learned is actually being transferred
and used as it was intended (Olsen, 1998). The paper begins by considering the
importance of time management and the approaches adopted to develop the associ-
ated skills. Previous research in this area is then considered and found to be inconclu-
sive. The approach and ﬁndings of the research reported here are then discussed and
evidence presented which demonstrates that time management training of the type
advocated by Covey 
 
et al.
 
 (1994) does appear to produce time management behav-
ioural improvements in the workplace.
 
The development of time management
 
Adair (1987, pp. 7–8) believes that time management is hard to deﬁne and quotes Leon
Alberti and Benjamin Franklin, of the 15th and 18th centuries respectively, as early
contributors in the ﬁeld with their notions of saving and using time, and time as a
valuable resource. Based on their ideas, the deﬁnition underpinning this research is
that time management is the use of time to achieve work and life goals. Little was
written on this subject prior to the work of Drucker (1970), Mackenzie (1972) and
Lakein (1973). Lakein’s inﬂuential work covers issues such as the importance of clear
goals, planning, prioritising, interruptions, procrastination, paperwork, delay and
continuous personal improvement and underpins much of the current time manage-
 
126
 
International Journal of Training and Development 
 
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005.
 
ment practice. However, the overall emphasis is on efﬁciency, exempliﬁed by his ﬁnal
appendix of 61 ways on ‘How I save time’ (Lakein, 1973, pp. 158–60).
Covey 
 
et al.
 
 (1994) usefully categorise four generations of time management. The
ﬁrst generation is based on reminders and characterised by simple notes and check-
lists. The second generation adds more planning, preparation, goal setting and
scheduling, featuring calendars and appointments on paper or computer. The third
generation adds prioritising and control with a review of values, the setting of long-
to short-term goals and daily prioritising, often in electronic or paper-based organisers.
Whilst these three generations may have improved people’s effectiveness, Covey 
 
et al.
 
still believe that these earlier approaches, with their emphasis on efﬁciency and organ-
isation, have failed to enable people to match what they regard as important and how
they actually spend their time. They therefore believe that these ﬁrst three generations
of time management simply do not work. Noon (1998, p. 11) expresses similar senti-
ments, believing that ‘we cannot go on doing more work in shorter time just because
the work is there to be done.’ Covey 
 
et al.
 
 (1994) propose a fourth generation of time
management, which, they claim, incorporates the best features of earlier generations
but focuses on identifying what is really important in life, and spending an increasing
amount of time on that. In similar vein, Noon (1998) advocates what he terms a
‘reductionist’ stance, which involves eliminating all unnecessary work, learning to say
‘no’ and, like Covey, focusing on what is important.
 
The evaluation of time management training
 
‘At best, management development and training must always be an act of faith’ (Peel,
1984, p. 35). That statement reﬂects the difﬁculty of evaluating training, echoed by
Robinson and Robinson (1989, p. 275), ‘no single factor, including training, could by
itself have brought about the change that has taken place.’ Stewart (1999, p. 180) adds
a further dimension when, after deﬁning evaluation as synonymous with assessment,
he says, ‘all assessment is necessarily and by deﬁnition subjective’ which should deter
people from ‘pursuing an unobtainable holy grail, i.e. clear and demonstrable proof
that investment in employee development brings measurable and valuable beneﬁts’
(Stewart, 1999, p. 194).
Yet, the increasing pressure within organisations to use resources as efﬁciently as
possible is also leading to an increasing requirement for accountability and for training
to be demonstrably effective (Phillips & Phillips, 2001) even in those areas which, in
the past, have been considered difﬁcult to measure. Evaluation of training involving
soft skills wherein ‘the topic is not a set of . . . rules for turning people into efﬁcient
machines but a set of principles which each individual must apply to his or her
situation’ (Richards, 1987, p. 73) has long been perceived as problematic by organisa-
tions. Time management is no exception and previous studies have failed to provide
convincing evidence about the impact of such training. Kirkpatrick (1994, p. 25) goes
so far as to observe that time management is one of the programmes where ‘it is
difﬁcult if not impossible to measure ﬁnal results’. However, identifying the transfer
of the knowledge and skills learnt during training into the workplace is an important
aspect of assessing whether training is having business impact (Olsen, 1998) and
attempts have been made to measure the impact of time management training. In
several cases where assessment was undertaken, self-reported, perceived improve-
ment in time management skills was not always matched by behavioural changes
relating to how people spent their time (for examples, see Briddell, 1987; Kirby, 1978;
Robinson, 1974). In other cases behaviour improvements were reported and included
more time spent on high priority tasks, both work and relaxation, completing projects
on time and making more time for academic reading (Hall & Hursch, 1982; King 
 
et al.
 
,
1986; Maher, 1986; Woolfolk & Woolfolk, 1986). However, in many of these cases
sample sizes were very small (n 
 
=
 
 2 to n 
 
=
 
 9) and their validity questioned (for
examples, see Macan, 1996; Slaven & Totterdell, 1993). Hanel 
 
et al.
 
 (1981) claimed
improved time management behaviours in one study but without the beneﬁt of sup-
porting empirical evidence. Britton and Tesser (1991) found a correlation between time
 
© Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2005.
 
Does time management training work? An evaluation
 
127
management training and the improvement of grades in American students, in con-
trast to Bost (1984) who had previously found that such training made no difference.
Slaven and Totterdell (1993) were unable to determine whether the time management
training they researched changed related behaviour. Macan’s (1994, 1996) research
suggested that such training did not, while Orpen’s (1993) research ﬁndings suggested
that it did.
A further area of contention which emerges in the context of time management
relates to the use of personal organisers, whether it be a simple diary or a more
comprehensive paper or electronic organiser, which are often portrayed as the corner-
stone of time management approaches. The time management literature warns of the
vested interest that the organiser companies have in selling the paper-based or soft-
ware versions and the danger of systems becoming an end in themselves, rather than
a means to an end (Adair, 1987; Atkinson, 1992; Bird, 1998; Clegg, 1999; Covey 
 
et al.
 
,
1994; Hindle, 1998; Noon, 1998). However, despite the lack of empirical evidence, there
appears to be a consensus that some form of system is needed if people are to manage
their time effectively, although the type of system is a matter of personal preference
and experimentation.
On the basis of existing empirical evidence, therefore, the picture in relation to the
effectiveness of time management training is confused and inconclusive. There are a
number of possible explanations for this confusion. The ﬁrst may lie in the nature of
the time management training involved which was likely to be of the three earlier
generations discussed above, rather than the more principles-driven ‘fourth genera-
tion’. A second possibility is the adoption of an inappropriate research approach;
Slaven and Totterdell (1993), for example, appear to have been overly positivist empha-
sising quantitative measures while overlooking strong qualitative evidence which
contradicted their unproven

## Clinical Significance
conclusion. Orpen (1993), Macan (1994 and 1996) and Jex
and Elaqua (1999), relied solely on quantitative data. Goldstein (1986, p. 22), concerned
about this general approach, argues that ‘the continuum from good to bad does not
have anchors with quantitative on the good side and qualitative on the bad side.’ Some
supporting observations or comments when measuring behaviour therefore seem
more appropriate than a purely quantitative approach.
A third explanation relates to the evaluation measurement method. Sharp and
Howard (1996), and Diamantopoulos and Schlegelmilch (2000) stress the importance
of ensuring the validity of measurement device measures. Sharp and Howard (1996)
also point out that some variables are hard to measure and time management comes
into this category (Kirkpatrick, 1994). In such cases, surrogate measures have been
developed such as the Time Structure Questionnaire (Bond & Feather, 1988), the Future
Perspective Scale (Bird & Jordan, 1987), the Time Urgency Scale (Landy 
 
et al.
 
, 1991)
and the Time Management Behaviour Scale (Macan 
 
et al.
 
, 1990). However, all these
measures are prescriptive and insufﬁciently ﬂexible to accommodate varying time
management training needs. Furthermore, their constructs are set at the operational,
rather than concept level. For example Macan’s (1996, pp. 231–2) model includes
constructs such as ‘I set short-term goals for what I want to accomplish in a few days
or weeks’ and ‘I make a list of things to do each day and check off each task as it is
accomplished’. The problem with this approach is that in order to cover all the aspects
of the subject, ‘it is possible – and often desirable – to have multiple deﬁnitions of the
same concept’ (Diamantopolous and Schlegelmilch, 2000, p. 22). Applying this to time
management would result in a huge number of operational deﬁnitions, making the
instrument unwieldy and impractical. Macan’s (1994) attempt to overcome this by
simplifying the subject into three broad areas raises Easterby-Smith’s (1994) concern
of oversimpliﬁcation, especially as Slaven and Totterdell (1993, p. 20) comment, ‘it is
difﬁcult to specify the exact behaviours which an effective time user ought to display’.

## References
References
Adair, J. (1987), How To Manage Your Time (Guildford: Talbot-Adair).
Adair, J. (1988), The Action-Centred Leader (London: The Industrial Society).
Alliger, G. and Janak, E. (1989), ‘Kirkpatrick’s levels of training criteria: thirty years later’,
Personnel Psychology, 42, 331–42.
Atkinson, J. (1992), Better Time Management (London: Thorsons).
Atkinson, S. (1999), ‘Reﬂection: Personal development for managers – getting the process right’,
Journal of Managerial Psychology, 14, 6, 502–10....
---
