---
# lacount2015
**Autores**: Not specified
**Año**: 2015
**Journal**: Scientific Paper
**DOI/Link**: N/A

## Abstract
Abstract
Objective: We sought to elucidate the effects of an organization, time management, and planning (OTMP) skills training 
intervention for college students reporting elevated levels of ADHD symptomatology and academic impairment. Method: 
Undergraduate participants enrolled in either the intervention (n = 22) or comparison (n = 15) condition in exchange 
for psychology course credit. Those in the intervention condition attended three weekly group meetings designed 
to improve organizational skills. Treatment effectiveness was evaluated by comparing pre- and postmeasurements of 
academic impairment, inattention, hyperactivity/impulsivity, and OTMP skills utilization.

## Key Findings
Discussion
The present investigation evaluated the acceptability, feasi-
bility, and preliminary efficacy of an OTMP group interven-
tion for college students who self-reported elevated levels 
of inattention or hyperactivity/impulsivity and academic 
impairment. The hypotheses that academic impairment, 
ADHD-I, and ADHD-H/I would improve for participants in 
the intervention group relative to a comparison group were 
supported with medium to large effect sizes. These results 
are consistent with previous research published on OTMP 
skills interventions for ADHD among children and adoles-
cents (e.g., Abikoff et al., 2013; Langberg, Epstein, Becker, 
Girio-Herrera, & Vaughn, 2012), as well as the results of 
more time-consuming, multicomponent treatments for 
adults with ADHD (e.g., Safren et al., 2010; Solanto et al., 
2010). The hypothesis that OTMP skills utilization would 
improve over time for participants in the intervention group 
relative to the comparison group was partially s... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
methods. That is, participants may 
not be able to provide the level of detail that the researcher 
is interested in obtaining. For example, it would have been 
valuable to explore how participants used their calendar 
(e.g., smartphone, paper calendar) to evaluate the relative 
efficacy of different schedule management approaches. 
Furthermore, the gains observed in students in the interven-
tion condition through self-report measures may have been 
confounded by various biases, such as social desirability 
bias (Demaio, 1984). Reported behaviors may have devi-
ated from actual behavior in fear of being perceived as 
uncooperative. Therefore, future investigations should 
include more objective (e.g., collateral reports of ADHD 
symptoms) and more distal outcome measures (e.g., home-
work completion, exam performance). However, these out-
come measures that have been used with children and 
adolescents are difficult to use for college students. For 
example, the course work, class grade distributions, and 
credit loads can vary considerably between college students 
and results in a lot of “nuisance” variance. This makes 
detecting reliable differences between groups on semester 
grades, for example, difficult unless the sample is very 
large. Even when an intervention emphasizes OTMP skills, 
is more time intensive (i.e., eight group CBT session and 
one-on-one peer mentoring), and results in similar improve-
ments in ADHD symptomatology and academic function-
ing with a sample approximately twice the size of the 
current study, semester GPA remains constant (Anastopoulos 
& King, 2015).
Second, participants were not randomly assigned to con-
ditions and this increases the likelihood of spurious thera-
peutic effects (Lilienfeld, Ritschel, Lynn, Cautin, & 
Latzman, 2014). Although baseline measures, demographic 
measures, and clinical characteristics were approximately 
similar, with the exception of sex, we cannot be certain that 
the treatment effects were not due to other possible group 
differences that were not measured. There were likely pre-
existing differences between students who enrolled in a 
study requiring attendance at three weekly group meetings 
(i.e., intervention group) and those who elected to instead 
participate in a two-part online survey study (i.e., compari-
son group). For example, those who elected to participate in 
the relatively time-intensive OTMP intervention may have 
been more motivated to adopt skills to improve their perfor-
mance in their classes. Given this limitation, the results of 
this study should be considered preliminary, and replication 
is warranted.
 at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on August 18, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
LaCount et al.	
9
Third, generalization of the current findings is limited to 
college students reporting elevated inattention or hyperac-
tivity/impulsivity and academic impairment, and not neces-
sarily those diagnosed with ADHD. The participants were 
also not seeking help to ameliorate their ADHD symptoms 
and ADHD-related impairment so they likely were less 
motivated to adopt the skills than individuals who are seek-
ing treatment would be. Thus, the sample is probably best 
defined as college students self-reporting elevated levels of 
ADHD-related behaviors and academic difficulties and 
agreeing to participate in a study in exchange for course 
credit. So although the sample may be compromised by the 
lack of similarities shared with those who seek treatment for 
their ADHD symptoms and impairment, the external valid-
ity of the sample is rather suitable for such an intervention.
Last, the limited sample size underscores the need for 
replication of the findings. In addition, the small sample 
likely attenuated the probability of detecting statistically sig-
nificant effects on some of the primary outcome measures 
with small effect sizes. This may explain the lack of signifi-
cant findings on the change in use of OTMP skills, because 
intervention effects were smaller than the other outcome 
measures. The small sample also hindered our ability to run 
adequately powered analyses to evaluate theoretical mecha-
nisms of change (e.g., change in OTMP skills utilization as 
mediator for improvements in other primary outcome vari-
ables) or assess possible moderators of treatment effects 
(e.g., ADHD medication status, sex). Although a small sam-
ple size was a hindrance to some conclusions that could be 
formed from this study, it is encouraging that we found 
medium- to large-sized improvements across most outcome 
measures despite being limited by sample size.
Future Directions
Although a brief OTMP intervention appears to have prom-
ise for improving academic functioning and decreasing 
inattention and hyperactivity/impulsivity symptom sever-
ity, there is considerable work to be done in developing and 
disseminating effective interventions for this population. 
First, more work is needed to develop reliable and valid 
OTMP skills utilization measures and outcome measures 
that are uniquely tailored to the college population. Research 
on the psychometric properties of distal outcome measures 
for this population is particularly scarce. Future investiga-
tions should evaluate factors that contribute to the large 
variability in distal measures of academic performance 
(e.g., GPA). Given that both groups in the present study evi-
denced improvements in OTMP skills utilization, research-
ers should evaluate the efficacy of modifying the present 
OTMP-focused treatment design to better foster improve-
ments in these domains—such as increasing the length of 
the intervention to increase “dosage” and allow for further 
practice of the OTMP skills. Moreover, researchers should 
use designs that allow investigators to assess the positive 
effects of a shorter OTMP intervention relative to a multi-
component intervention to better understand whether the 
individual OTMP component is equally effective to a more 
comprehensive intervention. Studies including an active 
comparison group, where students receive therapist atten-
tion, will allow for the potential impact of nonspecific ther-
apeutic effects to be measured. In addition, we only 
examined treatment outcomes in terms of pre- and post-
treatment differences. Future studies should investigate the 
maintenance of gains by including a follow-up period and 
possible mechanisms of change (e.g., calendar usage). It 
may also be that this intervention will work well for some 
college students, but less well for others. For instance, this 
treatment may not work well for college students experi-
encing co-occurring depression and anxiety. Thus, future 
studies are necessary to answer questions about moderators 
of treatment response.
Conclusion
Consistent with previous studies on interventions for chil-
dren and adolescents with ADHD (e.g., Abikoff et al., 2013; 
Langberg et al., 2012), the present investigation demon-
strated that interventions focusing on OTMP skills have 
potential for meaningful improvement in ADHD symptom-
atology and academic impairment in college students. This 
intervention may be an appropriate first-line approach for 
treating college students with ADHD symptomatology 
because it yields similar effects as stimulant medications 
(Wilens et al., 1998) with relatively lower risk of deleteri-
ous effects (Hartung, Canu, Cleveland et al., 2013; Rabiner 
et al., 2009; Weyandt & DuPaul, 2008) and is more effi-
cient, feasible, and cost-effective than multidimensional 
treatment programs (e.g., Safren et al., 2010; Solanto et al., 
2010). Further investigations of interventions focusing on 
organizational skills are needed to substantiate the efficacy 
of this treatment approach. However, these data suggest a 
low-intensity (3-week) group intervention for college stu-
dents with ADHD-related academic impairment can pro-
duce robust changes in inattention, hyperactivity/
impulsivity, and academic functioning. In turn, these 
improvements may enhance students’ test performance, 
assignment quality, rates of homework completion, and 
likelihood of graduating from college.
Acknowledgments
We thank the college students who participated and our colleague 
Joshua D. Clapp for assisting in preparing the article.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.
 at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on August 18, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
10	
Journal of Attention Disorders ﻿
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: This 
article is based on the first author’s master’s thesis and was sup-
ported in part by a research grant from the University of Wyoming, 
Lillian Portenier Trust Fund.
Note
1.	
As discussed by Cumming and Finch (2001), the choice to 
use alternative standardizers (e.g., variance of change scores, 
pooled variance at pre- and postassessment) is complex, pre-
cluding uniform calculations of effect size and corresponding 
confidence intervals across studies. Therefore, raw means 
and standard deviations are provided to facilitate independent 
calculations of metrics with alternative standardizers.

## Results
Results: Intervention group 
participants improved significantly on ratings of inattention, hyperactivity/impulsivity, and academic impairment, relative to 
the comparison group. Intervention group participants also improved in their use of OTMP skills, relative to their baseline 
ratings.

## Clinical Significance
Conclusion: This study suggests an organizational skills intervention has the potential to ameliorating ADHD 
symptomatology and academic impairment among college students. (J. of Att. Dis. XXXX; XX(X) XX-XX)
Keywords
organization, time management, planning, ADHD, college students
 at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on August 18, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
2	
Journal of Attention Disorders ﻿
students (Advokat et al., 2011; Rabiner, Anastopoulos, 
Costello, Hoyle, & Swartzwelder, 2008).
These medications are moderately effective in improv-
ing concentration in those with ADHD; yet, they have a 
number of limitations (Hartung, Canu, Cleveland, et al., 
2013; Wilens, Biederman, & Spencer, 1998). For example, 
psychostimulants have main effects that are limited to the 
hours in which they are pharmacologically active, are inef-
fective or intolerable in up to half of adults, and residual 
symptoms are common (G. Weiss & Hechtman, 1993; 
Wilens, Biederman, & Spencer, 2002). In our clinical expe-
riences, stimulants tend to improve core symptoms of 
ADHD (e.g., concentration and distractibility) but not skills 
associated with academic success (e.g., organization and 
time management). Finally, there is concern about stimulant 
misuse and diversion among college students (e.g., Hartung, 
Canu, Cleveland, et al., 2013; Rabiner et al., 2009; Weyandt 
& DuPaul, 2008). More specifically, Hartung, Canue, 
Cleveland, and colleagues (2013) found that college stu-
dents who have prescriptions for stimulants often do not 
take the medication regularly and, as a result, may have 
extra available to share with, or sell to, others. Given the 
concerns regarding the overall costs and benefits of stimu-
lants, adjunctive psychosocial interventions are often rec-
ommended (Dulcan & Benson, 1997; Prince, 2006; Wilens 
et al., 1998). Unfortunately, few empirical reports testing 
the efficacy of psychosocial interventions for ADHD among 
college students have been published (for an exception, see 
LaCount, Hartung, Shelton, Clapp, & Clapp, 2015).
Although significant work remains to be carried out, 
cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) has been recommended 
for treating college students with ADHD, as it appears to be 
the most effective psychosocial treatment for ADHD among 
nonemerging adults (Ramsay & Rostain, 2006). Several 
psychosocial interventions for adults with ADHD have 
been shown to be efficacious in randomized control trials 
(Knouse, Cooper-Vince, Sprich, & Safren, 2008). 
Preliminary efficacy studies have yielded promising results 
for individual CBT (Rostain & Ramsay, 2006; Safren et al., 
2010; Virta et al., 2010), group CBT (Salakari et al., 2010; 
Solanto et al., 2010; Stevenson, Whitmont, Bornholt, 
Livesey, & Stevenson, 2002; Virta et al., 2008, Wiggins, 
Singh, Getz, & Hutchins, 1999), coaching (Allsopp, 
Minskoff, & Bolt, 2005; Kubik, 2010; Swartz, Prevatt, & 
Proctor, 2005; Zwart & Kallemeyn, 2001), and group mind-
fulness training (Hesslinger et al., 2002; Mitchell, 
Zylowska, & Kollins, 2015; Philipsen et al., 2007; Zylowska 
et al., 2008). Unlike medication, psychosocial interventions 
provide adults with skills to ameliorate some of the primary 
functional impairments of ADHD. Overall, results have 
suggested that psychosocial interventions for adults with 
ADHD are effective in ameliorating core symptoms and 
functional impairment; however, no component studies 
evaluating how useful or efficacious treatment elements 
appear to be have been performed. Focused investigations 
on the efficacy of intervention components are necessary to 
determine the most efficient, effective, and cost-effective 
combination of intervention components.
In a review of treatments used to address the challenges 
of adults with ADHD, we divided the multicomponent 
approaches as a first step toward identifying the “active 
ingredients” of the psychosocial interventions (Hartung, 
Lefler, LaCount, Mancil, & Canu, 2012). Common ele-
ments of existing programs included psychoeducation; 
organization, time management, and planning skills 
(OTMP); memory management; study skills and accommo-
dations; increasing attention span; adaptive thinking; and 
mindfulness. Among the components of existing psychoso-
cial treatments for adults, the targeting of deficits in OTMP 
seems to be particularly relevant to college students with 
ADHD.
Disorganization and inattention appear to be the primary 
factors of impaired functioning among college students, 
especially in the area of academics. These symptoms have 
been associated with poorer time management, and being 
absent from or tardy to classes, meetings, and work (Kern, 
Rasmussen, Byrd, & Wittschen, 1999; Meaux, Green, & 
Broussard, 2009; Schwanz, Palm, & Brallier, 2007). 
Therefore, OTMP skills training interventions seem appro-
priate for college students with ADHD because they have 
significant impairments in organization that may contribute 
to the observed difficulties in academic achievement.
For many emerging adults with ADHD, impairment in 
three domains of functioning specific to the college envi-
ronment—OTMP—often persist into adulthood, when 
ADHD is associated with greater risk of unemployment, 
financial difficulties, depression, anxiety, relationship dif-
ficulties, and poor life satisfaction (Biederman et al., 2006). 
From this, it has been hypothesized that treatment 
approaches targeting the skills that seem relevant to aca-
demic functioning (e.g., OTMP) could be crucial in improv-
ing short- and long-term functioning in college students 
with ADHD (Fleming & McMahon, 2012; Green & Rabiner, 
2012). Thus, there is a need for trials targeting OTMP skills 
with college students to evaluate the efficacy of such tar-
geted interventions.
The aim of the current study was to provide a preliminary 
evaluation of an OTMP skills training intervention with a 
sample of college students reporting elevated levels of inat-
tention or hyperactivity/impulsivity ADHD symptom sever-
ity (hereafter referred to as ADHD-I and ADHD-H/I, 
respectively) and elevated levels of academic impairment. 
The primary dependent measures were ratings of academic 
impairment, use of OTMP skills (e.g., calendar, task lists), 
and ADHD-I and ADHD-H/I. In testing the feasibility of an 
OTMP skills training intervention for college students with 
ADHD and academic impairment, it was hypothesized that 
participants who received the intervention would improve 
 at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on August 18, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
LaCount et al.	
3
more significantly from pre- to postmeasurement of ADHD-I, 
ADHD-H/I, use of OTMP skills, and academic impairment 
relative to a comparison group. In addition, it is critical that 
treatment development researchers examine change on more 
distal outcomes to evaluate the impact of an OTMP interven-
tion on academic performance (for a more in-depth discus-
sion, see Chronis-Tuscano, Chacko, & Barkley, 2013; 
Sonuga-Barke et al., 2013). Therefore, we sought to evaluate 
the extent to which change in OTMP skills affect more distal 
outcomes, such as academic performance (i.e., GPA). Last, 
treatment feasibility and acceptability were assessed to sup-
plement the primary analyses and guide future treatment 
development.
Method
Participants
Participants in this study included undergraduate students 
enrolled in psychology courses at the University of 
Wyoming who completed research as a course requirement 
or for extra credit. Participants were eligible for the study if 
they completed the psychology department prescreener and 
scored 1 SD above the sample mean on a measure of self-
reported ADHD-I or ADHD-H/I (APA, 2013) and 1 SD 
above the mean on a measure of academic impairment. 
Students indicating that they are currently receiving psy-
chosocial treatment for ADHD were excluded from partici-
pating in the study because the treatment might overlap 
with the OTMP skills training intervention.
Differences in students’ schedules and the policies for 
assigning research credit precluded us from using random 
assignment. Participants meeting the inclusion criteria were 
first emailed an invitation to participate in a 3-week-long 
academic skills study in exchange for course credit (i.e., 
intervention group). Those who declined to participate in 
the intervention group or had a scheduling conflict with the 
group meeting times were invited to participate in an online 
study in which they completed a set of online question-
naires on two occasions during the school semester in 
exchange for course credit (i.e., comparison group).
Figure 1 outlines the participant recruitment process. Of 
the 41 students who participated in the study, 25 enrolled in 
the intervention group and 16 enrolled in the comparison 
group. A total of 4 participants were excluded from analy-
ses. Specifically, one comparison group participant did not 
complete any of the postmeasures and two intervention 
group participants were research assistants in our lab. One 
intervention group participant was omitted because he or 
she was undergoing an ADHD assessment, and eventually 
received therapeutic services, from the intervention group 
leader. Characteristics of the final sample (N = 37) are pro-
vided in Table 1. This study was reviewed and approved by 
the local institutional review board (IRB).
Measures
Barkley Adult ADHD Rating Scale–IV (BAARS-IV).  This form 
(Barkley & Murphy, 2006) includes 18 items that closely 
follow the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (5th ed.; DSM-V; APA, 2013) criteria for ADHD. 
Participants were asked to rate their current behavior from 
0 (never/rarely) to 3 (very often). The scale has demon-
strated good internal consistency for college students for 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th 
ed.; DSM-IV; APA, 1994) hyperactivity/impulsivity (α = 
.86) and DSM-IV inattention (α = .84; Fedele, Lefler, Har-
tung, & Canu, 2012). The present study used the total scores 
for the nine inattention symptom items and nine hyperactiv-
ity/impulsivity symptom items as measures of symptom 
severity.
Weiss Functional Impairment Rating Scale (WFIRS).  The 
WFIRS (M. D. Weiss, 2000) is a 70-item measure designed 
to measure current ADHD-related impairment across seven 
domains of functioning (i.e., Family, Work, School, Life 
Skills, Self-Concept, Social, and Risk). Hartung, Canu, 
Lefler, and colleagues (2013) reported good internal consis-
tency for Family, Life Skills, Social, and Risk subscales 
(α = .86, α = .89, α = .88, and α = .88, respectively) and 
excellent internal consistency for Work, School, Self-con-
cept, and Total Impairment subscales (α = .91, α = .90, α = 
.94, and α = .96, respectively). Hartung, Canu, Lefler, and 
colleagues also reported a strong correlation (p < .001) 
between the impairment subscales and ratings of current 
inattention (r = .45 to r = .68) and hyperactivity/impulsivity 
(r = .38 to r = .60). In the current study, the School subscale 
was used as a measure of academic impairment and con-
tains items asking participants to rate how often they have 
problems in various domains of academic functioning (e.g., 
completing assignments, getting work done efficiently, 
attending class, being late). Only the School subscale of the 
WFIRS was included in outcome analyses.
Course grades.  At the end of the semester in which students 
participated in the study, course grades were collected for 
all study participants. The colleges at the university used the 
same scale for grades where A = 4.0, B = 3.0, C = 2.0, D = 
1.0, and F = 0.0. GPA for the semester was calculated as the 
average of participants’ class grades. Courses with dichoto-
mous grading scales (i.e., satisfactory or unsatisfactory) 
were not included in the computation of the semester GPA.
OTMP Skills Utilization Scale.  This form contains 12 items 
asking participants to indicate how many days in the past 
week they used specific OTMP skills and strategies (e.g., 
put appointment into calendar, rating importance of task on 
to-do list). This measure was created for the current study 
and the items correspond to the use of the skills taught in the 
 at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on August 18, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
4	
Journal of Attention Disorders ﻿
OTMP intervention. The OTMP total score demonstrated 
good internal consistency in the current sample (α = .89).
Treatment Acceptability Questionnaire.  In addition to outcome 
measures, the acceptability of the OTMP group intervention 
was assessed with a nine-item questionnaire. The majority 
of items assessed the usefulness of specific treatment com-
ponents in improving their OTMP abilities. For example, 
participants in the OTMP group were asked to rate the use-
fulness of a daily planner to manage their schedules in 
improving their OTMP. Participants indicated the useful-
ness with each statement on a 5-point Likert-type scale 
from 0 (not at all useful) to 4 (very useful). In addition, par-
ticipants were asked to provide qualitative feedback on the 
intervention.
Procedure
Over the course of 7 weeks, intervention and comparison 
group participants were scheduled to complete pre- and 
postratings. All participants completed the aforementioned 
questionnaires through Survey Monkey, an online survey 
software. It was estimated that the set of questionnaires 
would take an hour to complete and allowed participants to 
take breaks as long as they did not close out of their web 
browser and exit the survey. Intervention group participants 
were also required to attend three OTMP intervention ses-
sions. In addition to earning research credit for their partici-
pation, participants in the intervention group earned raffle 
tickets for each scheduled meeting they attended and five 
additional tickets for attending all planned meetings (i.e., 
Recruitment
Assessed for 
eligibility
(n = 897) 
Met inclusion criteria 
(n = 75)
Agreed to participate 
(n = 41)
Enrollment
Enrolled in intervention
group (n = 25)
Enrolled in comparison 
group (n = 16)
Analysis
Retained for analyses
(n = 22)a
Retained for analyses 
(n = 15)b
Figure 1.  Sample recruitment and participation flowchart.
aThree participants in the intervention group were excluded from analyses. Two participants were excluded because they were undergraduate 
research assistants in the laboratory conducting the study. One participant completed a psychological assessment with the group leader and began 
cognitive-behavioral therapy at the same time the intervention group had their first meeting.
bOne participant in the comparison group was excluded from analyses because the researchers were unable to make contact or obtain postmeasures 
from the individual.
 at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on August 18, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
LaCount et al.	
5
“perfect attendance”). At the end of the study, one partici-
pant won an iPad Mini. Throughout the study, researchers 
sent electronic reminders to participants (i.e., text messages, 
emails) the day prior and the day of scheduled group 
meetings.
OTMP intervention.  The OTMP intervention delivered in 
this study was a condensed adaptation of the treatment pro-
tocol developed by Solanto, Marks, Mitchell, and Wasser-
stein (2011) to help adults cope with ADHD. The treatment 
developed by Solanto and colleagues (2011) included 12 
sessions that covered several topics, such as psychoeduca-
tion about ADHD, but largely focused on developing, 
implementing, and maintaining OTMP skills. The interven-
tion in the current study was delivered in three weekly, 1-hr 
group sessions in the evening, with each session targeting 
specific OTMP skills. Although not mandatory, take-home 
exercises were dispersed to participants at the end of the 
first two sessions and collected at the beginning of the 
meeting following the one in which they were originally 
handed out.
Session 1: Time awareness and scheduling.  This session 
consisted primarily of the introduction of task list and cal-
endar systems and the use of timepieces (e.g., watches, 
clocks) to improve time management. The group leader also 
helped each participant decide on an organizational system 
to start using (e.g., paper-and-pencil planner, Wunderlist, 
Google calendar). The participants were instructed to write 
all appointments in their calendars and to begin constructing 
“to-do” lists. As part of their take-home exercises, they were 
instructed to keep a log of everything they did on a weekday 
of their choice during the next week to help determine how 
they used their time. They were also tasked with estimating 
how long specific tasks took for them to complete (e.g., get-
ting ready in the morning, completing a school assignment) 
and then record how long the tasks actually took during the 
next week.
Session 2: Task and motivation management.  During this 
session, participants were presented with the strategies 
for making tasks more manageable and how to increase 
motivation through strategies, such as contingent self-rein-
forcement. During the session, the group leaders facilitated 
in-session exercises that included breaking down a large 
task into more manageable “chunks” and generating per-
sonal reward lists. Students were instructed to schedule 
and complete one or more small tasks and continue time-
logging and time-estimation exercises as needed during the 
next week.
Session 3: Implementing an organizational system.  In this 
final session, participants were presented with strategies 
for identifying priorities, using planners for prioritizing 
tasks, transferring items from to-do lists to schedules. Stu-
dents were instructed to schedule to-do list items and assign 
Table 1.  Baseline Demographics and Clinical Characteristics by Condition.
Variable
Intervention group (n = 22)
Comparison group (n = 15)
ta
p
M
(SD)
M
(SD)
Age
21.9
(6.0)
20.9
(3.7)
.53
.60
Year in college
2.3
(1.3)
2.0
(1.3)
.76
.45
High school GPA
3.5
(0.4)
3.3
(0.7)
.99
.33
College GPAb
2.5
(0.9)
2.6
(0.8)
.37
.71
ACT compositec
25.4
(3.6)
24.7
(3.7)
.52
.61
Credits enrolledd
14.1
(3.1)
14.5
(2.1)
.41
.69
 
n
(%)
n
(%)
χ2a
p
Male
12
(54.5)
12
(80.0)
4.42
.04
European American
15
(68.2)
14
(93.3)
4.20
.24
ADHD diagnosis
7
(31.8)
2
(13.3)
1.66e
.26
ADHD medication
1
(4.5)
1
(6.7)
0.38e
.60
Note. The table does not include the data of the participants who were omitted from outcome analyses (n = 4). GPA = grade point average;  
ACT = American College Test; ADHD diagnosis = reported to have received a diagnosis of ADHD; ADHD medication = reported to be taking 
ADHD medication during the study.
ap values are two-tailed.
bEleven students were completing their first semester of college and therefore had no college GPA to report.
cNine students did not indicate their ACT composite score.
dCourses from which the student withdrew were not included in calculating the number of credits they were enrolled in during the semester of the 
study.
eFisher’s (1992) exact test was employed given the low frequency count within cells.
 at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on August 18, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
6	
Journal of Attention Disorders ﻿
priority to tasks for a week. To facilitate the latter, par-
ticipants classified tasks within one of four quadrants in 
an importance grid (urgent and important, not urgent and 
important, urgent and not important, and not urgent and not 
important; Covey, 1991).
Analytic Approach
Independent-samples t tests and chi-square models for con-
tinuous and categorical variables, respectively, were per-
formed to examine the differences in the demographic and 
baseline clinical characteristics of the two groups and base-
line differences between groups across primary outcome 
variables (i.e., academic impairment, ADHD symptom 
severity, and OTMP utilization). Fisher’s (1922) exact test 
was used in place of chi-square when the frequency count 
within cells was low (n < 5). Next, differences in academic 
impairment, OTMP utilization, and ADHD-I and ADHD-
H/I severity across conditions were examined through mul-
tiple 2 (Group: OTMP and comparison) × 2 (Time: pre- and 
postintervention) repeated-measures ANOVAs. When 
Group × Time interactions were significant, paired-samples 
t tests were used to evaluate differences within groups. 
When Group × Time interaction effects did not reach sig-
nificance, independent-samples t tests were used to evaluate 
differences between groups on postintervention measures. 
Assuming there are minimal differences between groups on 
their baseline ratings, these analyses provide a parsimoni-
ous model for exploring group differences across the pri-
mary outcome variables that preclude violations of 
sphericity in designs with three or more repeated measures 
(Vasey & Thayer, 1987). Last, we wanted to explore the 
possible impact of the intervention on more distal measures 
of functioning. Therefore, independent-samples t tests were 
used to compare the end-of-semester GPAs between the two 
groups.
The magnitude of omnibus effects for repeated-measures 
ANOVAs was calculated using partial eta squared ( ηp2 ). 
Within-group effects (Cohen’s d) and corresponding confi-
dence intervals for within-groups effect sizes were stan-
dardized using the variability of baseline scores (Cumming 
& Finch, 2001; Howell, 2011).1 Between-group effects 
were calculated using Hedges’s g (Hedges, 1982). Values 
for ηp2  of .01, .06, and .14 were considered small, medium, 
and large effects, respectively; corresponding values for d 
and g are .20, .50, and .80 (Cohen, 1988).
Results
Baseline Equivalence
Chi-square models and independent-samples t tests demon-
strated equivalency between the intervention (n = 22) and 
comparison groups (n = 15) on all but one demographic 
variable (see Table 1). Specifically, there was a larger pro-
portion of women in the comparison group (80%) than the 
intervention group (55%; p = .04). Independent-samples t 
tests demonstrated pretreatment equivalence between the 
intervention and comparison groups on academic impair-
ment (p = .25), OTMP skills utilization (p = .48), ADHD-I 
(p = .50), and ADHD-H/I (p = .08).
Primary Outcome Analyses
Academic impairment.  Academic impairment evidenced a 
large Group × Time interaction effect (p = .02, ηp2  = .15; see 
Table 2) with participants enrolled in the intervention group 
(M = 10.36, SD = 5.44) reporting less academic impairment 
than those in the comparison group (M = 12.27, SD = 7.59). 
Within-groups pairwise comparisons indicated a medium-
sized decreasing effect on academic impairment among the 
intervention group (Δ = −3.86, SEΔ = 1.17, p = .003, d = .70, 
95% confidence interval [CI] = [1.44, 6.29]) with no change 
among those who only completed pre- and postintervention 
measures (Δ = 0.20, SEΔ = 0.99, p = .84, d = .03).
OTMP skills utilization.  Although postmeasures of OTMP 
skills utilization was higher among participants in the 
OTMP intervention group (M = 42.27, SD = 25.94) than in 
the comparison group (M = 28.67, SD = 17.56), there was 
not a significant Group × Time interaction effect for OTMP 
skills utilization (p = .20, ηp2  = .05). Relative to baseline, 
Table 2.  Comparison of Outcomes at Posttreatment.
Variable
Intervention group (n = 22)
Comparison group (n = 15)
Group × Time interaction
da
Pre M
(SD)
Post M
(SD)
Pre M
(SD)
Post M
(SD)
F(1, 35)
p
ηp2
School
14.23
(5.55)
10.36
(6.21)
12.07
(5.44)
12.27
(7.59)
6.19
.018
.15
.70
OTMP
30.27
(17.56)
42.27
(25.94)
25.73
(21.15)
28.67
(20.05)
1.70
.201
.05
.68
ADHD-I
13.73
(5.51)
10.50
(5.56)
12.33
(6.86)
12.27
(6.26)
4.71
.037
.12
.59
ADHD-H/I
12.41
(5.88)
8.09
(5.66)
8.80
(6.00)
9.67
(5.77)
18.71
<.001
.35
.74
Note. School = academic impairment; OTMP = organization, time management, and planning skills utilization; ADHD-I = ADHD–inattention symptom 
severity; ADHD-H/I = ADHD–hyperactivity/impulsivity symptom severity.
aEffect size for within-group pairwise comparisons of intervention group participants, standardized using variability of scores at baseline.
 at CAMBRIDGE UNIV LIBRARY on August 18, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
LaCount et al.	
7
participants in the OTMP intervention group exhibited a 
medium-sized increase on their use of OTMP skills (Δ = 
12.00, SEΔ = 4.97, p= .03, d = .68) with no significant 
change among those in the comparison group (Δ = 2.93, 
SEΔ = 4.18, p = .003, d = .14).
ADHD-I symptom severity.  A medium-sized Group × Time 
interaction was observed for ADHD-I (p = .04, ηp2  = .12) 
with participants in the intervention group (M = 10.50, 
SD = 5.56) exhibiting less severe ADHD-I symptoms than 
comparison group participants (M = 12.27, SD = 6.26). 
Within-group pairwise comparisons found a medium-sized 
decrease in ADHD-I among participants in the intervention 
group (Δ = −3.23, SEΔ = 1.05, p = .003, d = .59) and no 
change among comparison group participants (Δ = −0.07, 
SEΔ = 0.87, p = .94, d = .01).
ADHD-H/I symptom severity.  ADHD-H/I evidenced a large 
Group × Time interaction effect (p < .001, ηp2  = .35) with 
participants in the intervention group (M = 8.09, SD = 5.66) 
reporting less severe hyperactivity/impulsivity than those in 
the comparison group (M = 9.67, SD = 5.77). Within-groups 
pairwise comparisons indicated a medium-sized decreasing 
effect on reported ADHD-H/I among participants in the 
intervention group (Δ = −4.32, SEΔ = 0.70, p = .003, d = .74) 
with no change in the comparison group (Δ = 0.87, SEΔ = 
1.02, p = .41, d = .14).
Semester grades.  Independent-samples t tests were used to 
compare semester GPAs between groups. There were no 
statistically significant differences between participation 
semester GPAs for students in the comparison group (M = 
2.74, SD = 0.85) and the intervention group (M = 2.40, 
SD = 1.09; p = .32 g = .33).
OTMP Feasibility and Acceptability
Regarding treatment feasibility, all 25 of the participants in 
the intervention group completed the study, whereas 1 of 
the 16 in the comparison group participants did not com-
plete the study (see Figure 1). On average, intervention 
group participants attended 2.78 (SD = 0.44) out of three 
sessions, which is an attendance rate of 92%. No interven-
tion group participant missed more than one session and 
only 6 participants missed one session. Although complet-
ing the two take-home exercises was not compulsory for 
participants to earn research credits or raffle tickets, the 
completion rate of the two take-home exercises for partici-
pants who attended the group meeting in which the exer-
cises were assigned was 82%.
Treatment acceptability was evaluated through interven-
tion group participants’ open-ended responses on a post-
study questionnaire. Examination of item mean scores 
revealed that participants felt that using a calendar to 
manage their schedule (M = 3.3, SD = 0.9) and breaking 
down large tasks into more manageable tasks (M = 3.2, SD 
= 0.7) were the most useful skills for improving their OTMP 
abilities. Students also reported that they would feel com-
fortable recommending this intervention to a friend (M = 
2.9, SD = 0.9) and felt confident in their ability to continue 
to use the strategies learned in the intervention in the future 
(M = 2.7, SD = 1.1).
Participants’ responses also indicated that the two least 
helpful OTMP skills were wearing a watch (M = 1.9, SD = 
1.8) and using time awareness exercises (M = 2.3, SD = 
1.4), such as completing an hourly activity log or estimating 
how long a task will take to complete, completing the task, 
and comparing the predicted time with the actual time. 
Indeed, when students were asked to provide feedback on 
the intervention, many commented that less emphasis 
should be placed on wearing a watch. For example, many 
noted they typically have access to various sources of time 
(e.g., phones, computers, wall clocks).

## References
References
Abikoff, H., Gallagher, R., Wells, K. C., Murray, D. W., Huang, 
L., Lu, F., & Petkova, E. (2013). Remediating organiza-
tional functioning in children with ADHD: Immediate 
and long-term effects from a randomized controlled trial. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81, 113-128. 
doi:10.1037/a0029648
Advokat, C., Lane, S. M., & Lou, C. (2011). College students 
with and without ADHD: Comparison of self-report of 
medication usage, study habits, and academic achieve-
ment....
---
