---
# Omega-3 Fatty Acid and ADHD: Blood Level Analysis and Meta-Analytic Extension of Supplementation Trials
**Autores**: Elizabeth Hawkey
**Año**: 2014
**Journal**: Clinical Psychology Review, Accepted manuscript. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2014.05.005
**DOI/Link**: N/A

## Abstract
Abstract: 193 
Figures: 5 
 
Omega-3 Fatty Acid and ADHD: Blood Level Analysis and Meta-Analytic Extension of 
Supplementation Trials 
 
Elizabeth Hawkeya & Joel T. Nigga,b 
 
aDepartment of Behavioral Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR. 
bDepartments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, OR. 
 
Running head: Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
 
Correspondence: 
Joel Nigg, Ph.D. 
Department of Psychiatry 
Oregon Health & Science University 
3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Road 
Portland, OR 97236 
Tel: (503) 418-8498 
Fax: (503) 418 8416 
Email: niggj@ohsu.edu 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
2 
 
Abstract 
Interest in the value of omega-3 (n-3) fatty acid supplementation for treatment of ADHD remains 
high. No prior meta-analysis has examined whether ADHD is associated with alterations in 
blood lipid levels and meta-analyses of supplementation have reached conflicting

## Key Findings
Discussion 
 
Ongoing public and scholarly interest in the relevance of omega-3 fatty acid 
supplementation for ADHD mandates further study. Here, we followed up recent meta-analyses 
of supplementation trials with (a) a first meta-analysis of blood levels and (b) a refined and 
updated meta-analysis of intervention trials with a larger pool of studies and participants than 
previously examined. Study 1 found that children with ADHD, in fact, do exhibit lower blood 
levels of omega-3 fatty acids. This is important and requires discussion. Study 2 largely 
confirmed, using alternative methods and additional studies, that intervention does have a small 
but reliable benefit on ADHD symptoms, supporting two prior meta-analyses and disagreeing 
with one prior meta-analysis. The estimates of effect size were also largely congruent. Our best 
estimate of the intervention effect size is g=.26, 95% CI=0.15-0.37. Sonuga-Barke et al., (2013), 
reported an effect of SMD=0.21 (best studies, ‘proba... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
Methods: We report two new meta-analyses. Study 1 examined blood levels of omega-3 fatty 
acids in relation to ADHD. Study 2 examined a larger sample of randomized intervention trials 
than previously reported.

## Results
Results: Study 1 included 9 studies (n=586) and found lower overall 
blood levels of n-3 in individuals with ADHD versus controls (g=0.42, 95% CI=0.26-0.59; 
p<.001). Study 2 included 16 studies (n=1408) and found that n-3 supplementation improved 
ADHD composite symptoms; using the best available rating and reporter (g=0.26, 95% CI=0.15-
0.37; p<.001). Supplementation showed reliable effects on hyperactivity by parent and teacher 
report, but reliable effects for inattention only by parent report. Conclusions: Omega-3 levels 
are reduced in children with ADHD. Dietary supplementation appears to create modest 
improvements in symptoms. There is sufficient evidence to consider omega-3 fatty acids as a 
possible supplement to established therapies. However it remains unclear whether such 
intervention should be confined to children with below normal blood levels.   
 
Key words: ADHD; omega 3; polyunsaturated fatty acids; supplementation; intervention; meta-
analysis 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
3 
 
Abbreviations:  
EFA: Essential Fatty Acid 
PUFA: Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids  
LC-PUFA: Long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids 
n-3: Omega-3 fatty acids      
ALA (Alpha-linolenic acid) 
DHA (docosahexaenoic acid) 
EPA (eicosapentaenoic acid) 
n-6: Omega-6 fatty acids 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
4 
 
Introduction 
Whether ADHD may be related to inadequate bioavailability of omega-3 fatty acids, and 
whether it may be improved by dietary supplementation, has drawn increasing interest in part 
due to the growing awareness of the role of nutrition in neural development (Janssen & Kiliaan, 
2013) and, potentially, in ADHD (Nigg et al., 2012; Arnold et al., 2011 Bloch & Qawasmi, 2011; 
Stevenson et al., 2014). Furthermore, the importance of long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids 
(LC-PUFA), in particular omega-3 long chain fatty acids, has been highlighted as a promising 
area of research interest to physical as well as mental health (Milte, Sinn & Howe, 2009; Sinn & 
Bryan, 2007; Vaisman et al., 2008; Voigt et al., 2001).  It is increasingly recognized that like 
other mental disorders, ADHD, while heritable, is probably a product of interplay of genetic 
liability and environmental stressors (Nigg, Nikolas, & Burt, 2010), of which nutrition may be a 
component. However, recent reviews and meta-analyses have reached conflicting conclusions 
with regard to omega-3 supplementation, as detailed below.  
Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) exist in two classes: Omega-3 (n-3) and Omega-6 
(n-6) and humans cannot synthesize them.  Once ingested, short chain PUFAs are converted to 
long-chain fatty acids (LC-PUFA); their conversion chains are summarized in Figure 1. Optimal 
health and development require a balanced ratio of n-3 to n-6 but the typical western diet 
provides a much larger share of n-6 as compared to n-3, often resulting in an imbalance and in 
insufficient n-3 (Schuchardt, Huss, Stauss-Grabo & Hahn, 2009). Therefore the n-3 status is of 
most interest in the present report. In that domain, as Figure 1 shows, ALA (which must be 
ingested) is converted to EPA and then DHA through enzymatic elongation, resulting in their 
designation as LC-PUFA. Genetically mediated differences in conversion and metabolism may 
be present if children with ADHD have low blood levels of EPA and DHA despite adequate 
dietary intake and absorption. A first question, therefore, is whether ADHD is characterized by 
lower blood levels of these compounds.  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
5 
 
EPA and DHA are the most well studied and accordingly are the most commonly 
supplemented fatty acids in over-the-counter fish oils; DHA has been added to many pre-natal 
vitamins and to infant formula.  Breast milk also naturally contains LC-PUFAs, which may be 
related to better cognitive outcomes in children who were breastfed (Drane & Logemann, 2000), 
compared to formulas prior to their supplementation with LC-PUFAs (Belfort et al., 2013). 
Additionally, recent research has shown inverse correlations between levels of DHA in cord 
blood and offspring inattention and hyperactivity at age ten years (Kohlboeck et al., 2011).  
Links to ADHD are plausible because fatty acids are essential to neural development 
and signaling. For example, levels of available PUFA and LC-PUFA influence cell membrane 
fluidity, affecting absorption or release of neurotransmitters (Janssen & Kiliaan, 2013). Adding to 
the importance of the current study is that consumers may in fact frequently be supplementing 
children’s diets in an effort to control ADHD symptoms (Millichap & Yee, 2012). This makes 
evidence as to their effectiveness—or not—quite timely.   
Multiple studies, reviews and three prior meta-analyses have examined the efficacy of 
fatty acid supplementation on ADHD symptoms. The following summary of their findings notes 
relevant limitations of each study’s methodology. Bloch and Qawasmi (2011) examined 10 
intervention studies of ADHD and fish oil (a major source of PUFAs) or omega-3 
supplementation, selected either a parent or teacher rating from each study but did not compare 
them, and concluded that there was a benefit, with a standardized mean effect size (SMD) of 
0.31 (95% CI=0.16 to 0.47, p<0.001). Gillies et al. (2012) included studies using any 
combination of omega-3 and omega-6 acids but pooled results separately for different study 
designs, leading to small sample sizes for particular comparisons. Although they noted a higher 
likelihood of improvement in the omega-3/6 group compared to placebo (risk ratio=2.19, 95% 
CI=1.04-4.62), this pertained only to two studies. Their primary conclusion was that when they 
pooled 5 studies of ADHD symptoms (n=413) there was no difference in ADHD symptoms by 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
6 
 
parent-rating (SMD (standard mean difference) = 0.17, 95% CI=0.03-0.38) or teacher rating 
(SMD=0.05, 95% CI=-0.18-0.27). Sonuga-Barke et al. (2013) examined 11 intervention studies 
(7 studies included in Bloch & Qawasmi 2011 and 2 studies supplementing with only n-6) and 
selected the “most proximal rater.” They found a reliable but modest effect of SMD=0.21 (95% 
CI=0.05-0.36, p=0.007), which weakened to SMD = 0.16 (95% CI=0.01-0.31, p=0.04) when only 
“probably blinded” trials were included. Stevenson et al. (2014) reviewed and critiqued these 
meta-analyses as well as newer studies, and concluded that LCPUFA’s have a modest effect on 
ADHD symptoms. We sought to expand and clarify the previous work in three ways.  
First, it is unclear whether children with ADHD have inadequate baseline omega-3 
levels. This is relevant to theories of etiology and to directing future work to determine whether 
all or only some children with ADHD may be appropriate clinical targets for supplementation. No 
prior meta-analysis had addressed this critical point, to the best of our knowledge, although 
some studies have shown reduced levels in participants with ADHD in comparison to reference 
samples (Antalis, Stevens, Campbell, et al. 2006; Stevens, Zhang, Peck, et al., 2003). 
Second, with regard to results of supplementation trials, it is unclear whether ADHD 
symptom domains of (a) inattention/disorganization versus (b) hyperactivity/impulsivity respond 
differentially to supplementation, which will be important to interpreting future studies as well as 
aiming toward individualized clinical application of dietary supplementation. Gillies et al. (2012) 
looked at this but only across 5 studies, and we sought here to do so more comprehensively.  
Third, previous meta-analyses have been inconsistent when examining the potential 
effects the rater may have on the results. We were interested in rater effects as a sign of 
replication or non-replication of results across rater and setting, important to fully evaluating the 
strength and generalizability of effects—particularly in light of questions about adequacy of 
observer blinding in these studies. No prior meta-analysis directly examined this. 
Finally, each prior meta-analysis excluded some available studies for various reasons. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
7 
 
We added 5 studies that none of the other meta-analyses used. Three of these are relatively 
new reports that met our criteria for inclusion (Milte et al. 2012; Perera et al. 2012; Richardson 
et al. 2012). As far as we can tell, should they have been published at the time, they would have 
met inclusion criteria for one or more of the prior meta-analyses. We also included Kirby, 
Woodward, Jackson et al. (2010). It was not mentioned by the prior reviews but it appeared to 
us that it would have met inclusion criteria for one or more of them because it was a randomized 
controlled trial using a validated ADHD rating scale. We added one other study: Itomura et al. 
(2005). It was considered only by Bloch and Qawasmi (2011), who excluded the study because 
it was not clear what parent-rating scale of DSM symptoms was used or whether it was done 
with a validated rating scale. We did not consider this a reason to exclude the study, because 
counts of ADHD symptoms by parent rating tend to be highly correlated across types of 
measures, and number of DSM symptoms (albeit assessed with a known rating scale) has been 
used in other important ADHD treatment studies including the MTA study. We excluded 4 
studies that were used in at least one previous analysis. Aman et al. (1987) and Arnold et al. 
(1989) were excluded for using only omega-6 as the intervention.  Although Hirayama et al. 
(2004) met our inclusion criteria, insufficient data were published in the paper to enable an 
effect size to be computed and attempts to reach the author were unsuccessful.  Finally, Brue et 
al. (2001) was excluded for using a supplement with various active compounds so that effects 
could not be attributed to n-3. All of this resulted in an updated and larger data base than any 
prior meta-analysis with which to estimate population effects, focused specifically on n-3.   
 
We organize this report into two distinct meta-analyses. Study 1 aims to examine blood 
lipid profiles of children with and without ADHD. Study 2 aims to replicate and extend meta-
analytic results for intervention studies of omega-3 fatty acids and fish oil.  
Both meta-analyses included studies that reported n-3 data; report of n-6 data was not 
used herein. We made this decision because n-6 PUFA levels are typically higher than n-3 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
8 
 
levels; therefore increases in dietary intake produce only modest increases in the linoleic acid 
(LA) and arachidonic acid (AA) content of the plasma. However, even small increases in dietary 
n-3 PUFA intake can produce relatively large increases in plasma n-3 PUFA.  Additionally, n-6 
acids have pro-inflammatory properties while n-3 acids have anti-inflammatory properties; the 
latter are more heavily theorized to be beneficial for ADHD and brain development under 
Western diets (Schuchardt et al. 2009). 
STUDY 1: Blood lipid profiles of children with and without ADHD 
Search Methods 
Pubmed and Pyschinfo were used for the article search from January 2001 through 
March 2013. Search terms included: ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, fatty acid, n-
3, omega 3, polyunsaturated fatty acids, PUFA, blood levels, plasma and RBC. In addition we 
searched reference sections of prior meta-analyses and reviews. 
Inclusion Criteria  
Inclusion in Study 1 required (a) an operationally defined ADHD group,  
(b) a control group exhibiting typical development, (c) reported data of red blood cells 
(erythrocytes) and/or plasma levels of omega-3 compounds.  Plasma levels reflect more recent 
fluctuations (days) in phospholipids while erythrocytes reflect more long term changes (months).  
Studies were excluded for not having a control group (Gow et al., 2009, Sorgi et al., 2007 and 
Vaisman et al., 2008), or if data were not reported or discoverable upon inquiry (Germano et al., 
2007, Itomura et al., 2005 and Stevens et al, 1996). Figure 2 shows the flow diagram of study 
selection and exclusion on the left hand side.  Moderators tested include: age, tissue type, and 
nation in which the study was conducted. 
Analytic approach 
The software Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (Borenstein et al., 2005) was used to 
calculate effect sizes and analyze pooled results. A random effects model was used and effect 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
9 
 
size was calculated using Hedges’s g (a bias corrected version of Cohen’s “d”) with a 95% CI.  
Heterogeneity was quantified using the I2 statistic and statistically tested with the Q statistic 
(Huedo-Medina, 2006).  
Results 
 
Study 1 included 9 studies (n=586) with an average age of 16.3 (age range 8-35); these 
studies are summarized in Table 1.  Blood levels were entered for all reported categories of 
omega-3’s including: EPA, DHA, ALA and DPA.  We first pooled all four values (or all available 
if less than four reported) within study using the default modified fixed effects model provided in 
CMA, (using a fixed effect model within study), and conducted a meta-analysis of the pooled 
effect sizes using a random effects model. That result revealed lower overall levels of n-3 in the 
ADHD subjects (g=0.42, 95% CI=0.26-0.59, z=5.05, p < .001); the results are depicted as a 
forest plot in Figure 3. We next filtered for EPA and DHA only (long chain fatty acids), pooling 
those two values within study. When we did this the effect was somewhat larger (g=0.51, 95% 
CI 0.34-0.67, z=6.00, p <0.001). We then examined EPA alone (g=0.41, 95% CI 0.25-0.57, 
z=4.91, p <0.001) and DHA alone, which showed the largest effect (g=0.59, 95% CI 0.40-0.77, 
z=6.34, p <0.001), suggesting that DHA levels were likely “carrying” much of the n-3 effect.  
 
Secondary analyses are reported on the pooled result (that is, across all four n-3’s). For 
that effect, heterogeneity was not observed (I2=0%, Q=4.5, p=0.81). When testing for 
moderators, no significant effects were seen for age, tissue type (RBC vs. plasma) or nation in 
which the study was conducted (all p > .07). A sensitivity analysis (one study removed) revealed 
no significant effect from a single study removed; point estimate range 0.39 to 0.47 (all p < 
0.001).  To address the possibility of a file drawer effect, Orwin’s fail-safe N indicated that 30 
unpublished studies with a zero effect would be necessary to reduce the effect size of Study 1 
to a trivial g=0.10. Investigation of publication bias indicated the presence of bias (i.e., over-
representation of large studies); Duval and Tweedie’s Trim and Fill analysis was applied to 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
10 
 
address this bias. This procedure examines the funnel plot for asymmetry around the observed 
mean and fills in (imputes) missing studies of equal size to create a symmetric funnel plot and 
evaluate the change in estimate. This procedure required adding of three imputed studies 
(effect sizes) the left side of the funnel plot to create symmetry. This reduced the effect size only 
slightly (g=0.36, 95% CI 0.21-0.51, Q=7.86) suggesting again that publication bias was unlikely 
to account for findings.   
Summary of Study 1 
Children with ADHD had reliably lower blood levels of n-3 fatty acids than typically 
developing children, with a moderate effect size of one third (pooled across compounds) to one 
half (for DHA/EPA) of a standard deviation and a 95% confidence interval ranging from ¼ to ¾ 
of a standard deviation.  
STUDY 2:  Intervention studies of omega-3 fatty acids in ADHD 
Search Methods 
Pubmed and Psychinfo were used for the article search from January 2001 through 
March 2013.  Search terms included: ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, fatty acid, n-
3, omega 3, polyunsaturated fatty acids, PUFA, supplementation and intervention. Prior reviews 
were examined to ensure all studies cited by them were considered. When insufficient data 
were reported attempts were made to contact authors to acquire the data. Figure 2 shows the 
flow diagram of study selection and exclusion on the right hand side.   
Analytic approach  
 
This was identical to Study1. 
Inclusion Criteria  
Inclusion in the analysis of intervention studies required (a) randomized, single or double 
blind trial with an n-3 compound, examining change in ADHD symptoms in children with or 
without ADHD, (b) used a validated parent or teacher rating scale of ADHD symptoms or DSM-
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
11 
 
IV classifications, (c) reporting of dosage and compound, and (d) duration of intervention. Seven 
potential studies were excluded for the following reasons: not including a placebo control group 
(Joshi et al., 2006; Germano et al., 2007), not supplementing with n-3 (Aman et al., 1987; 
Arnold et al., 1988), being open label (Sorgi et al., 2007), insufficient data reporting to enable 
calculation of an effect size (Hirayama, Hamazaki & Terasawa 2004), with no response from the 
author when contacted, and for using a supplement with additional active compounds (Brue et 
al., 2001).  
Individual analyses were performed on (a) parent and (b) teacher ratings on three 
outcome measures: (1) a composite measure of ADHD using the best available summary 
measure (either Conners’ ADHD Index or, if not available, DSM-IV total symptom score) (2) 
inattention symptom total, (3) hyperactivity-impulsivity symptom total. Moderators tested using 
meta-regression include: intervention compound and dosage, length of intervention, reporter, 
nation, and mean age.  Heterogeneity and publication bias were handled as in Study 1. In 
addition, a replication analysis was performed on Bloch and Qawasmi’s (2011) work using a 
random effects model, including two new studies that identified an ADHD group by diagnosis or 
rating scale, following Bloch and Qawasmi’s inclusion criteria.   
Results 
 
16 Intervention Studies (n=1408) with an average age of 9.7 (age range 6-18) were 
included in the initial analysis and are summarized in Table 2.  The average n-3 dosage was 
616mg and the average length of dose was 14.5 weeks.   
Overall Effect on ADHD Symptoms 
Examining the ADHD composite measure using the best available single measure 
pooled within study, across parent and teacher, revealed a small but statistically reliable 
reduction in ADHD symptoms (g=0.26, 95% CI=0.15-0.37, z=4.73, p <.001) and showed 
minimal heterogeneity (I2=25%. Q=16, p=0.16). The results are depicted as a forest plot in 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
12 
 
Figure 4. This effect replicated well when examined by reporter. In parent report (n=1201), 
g=0.22, 95% CI=0.11-0.33, z=3.99, p <.001; minimal heterogeneity was observed (I2=19%, 
Q=14.8, p=0.25). In teacher report (n=640), g=0.17, 95% CI=0.02-0.32, z=2.18, p <.05; no 
heterogeneity observed (I2=0%, Q=2.3, p=0.80). 
Symptom Specific Reports 
Our next analysis looked at individual symptom domains across reporters. For the 
hyperactivity-impulsivity symptom domain, pooled parent/teacher data showed a reliable 
symptom reduction post supplementation (n=1254, g=0.26, 95% CI=0.13-0.39, z=3.96, p 
<.001). Parent report alone showed essentially the same effect (n=1201, g=0.23, 95% CI=0.10-
0.36, z=3.48, p <.01); although heterogeneity was observed (I2=41%, Q=20.4, p=0.06). The 
heterogeneity was completely removed with one outlier eliminated (Perera et al., 2012), (I2=0%, 
Q=6.9, p=0.81) but this reduced the overall effect (g=0.17, 95% CI=0.07-0.26, z=3.41, p < .01). 
Teachers reported a nearly identical reduction in hyperactivity (n=640, g=0.22, 95% CI=0.06-
0.37, z=2.79, p < 0.01), with no heterogeneity.  
 
For the inattention symptom domain, pooled parent/teacher report showed a slightly 
smaller reduction in inattentive symptoms (n=1171, g=0.22, 95% CI=0.10-0.34, z=3.61, p 
<.001). Parent report indicated the same reduction in inattention (n=1118, g=0.22, 95% 
CI=0.09-0.34, z=3.36, p <.01) with modest heterogeneity (I2=26%, Q=14.8, p=0.19).  However, 
teacher report of inattention was not significant (n=639, g=0.12, 95% CI=-0.03-0.28, z=1.57, 
p=0.78).   
Replication Analysis 
A replication analysis was performed on the meta-analysis reporting the largest effect 
size of SMD=0.31 (Bloch & Qawasmi, 2011). We first analyzed only the studies included in their 
analysis using a random effects design (they used a fixed effect model), and found a similar 
result of g=0.29.  We then included two studies that were not published at the time of their 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
13 
 
analysis but which we judged would have met their inclusion criteria (Perera et al., 2012; Manor 
et al., 2012). This increased the effect slightly to g=0.35, 95% CI=0.20-0.50, z=4.62, p < .001. 
Moderators 
Moderator effects were investigated secondarily only for the best single composite 
measure (the largest effect) using meta-regression. Overall n-3 dose effects were non-
significant (z=-0.687, p=0.49). However, when investigating long chain fatty acids separately, a 
significant positive effect was shown for EPA dose (z=2.280, p < .05), suggesting that increased 
dosages of EPA improved ADHD symptoms. A scatterplot of the results is shown in Figure 5.  
Conversely, although DHA was associated with improved symptoms at all dosages, it showed a 
slightly negative dosage effect (z= -2.164, p < .05), although this dosage effect was non-
significant when one outlier (Milte et al., (2011), was removed (p=.11). EPA dosage slope 
remained significant (p=.01) after removing Milte et al., (2011). A negative correlation of -.25 
between DHA and EPA dosage was noted, suggesting the dosage relationship of DHA and EPA 
may explain the apparent negative dosage effect for DHA. That is, EPA showed more benefit at 
higher dosage. 
Dose duration, reporter, nation, and child age all showed no significant effect (all p > .59) 
and no obvious outliers. A sensitivity (one-study-removed) analysis revealed no significant effect 
(point estimate range g=0.20 to 0.28, all still significant at p<.001). Nation was also investigated 
grouped by “western” and “non-western” countries in an attempt look at possible cross-cultural 
differences; this result was also non-significant (z=-0.69, p=0.49).  
Investigation of publication bias again indicated the presence of bias. Duval and 
Tweedie’s Trim and Fill analysis required imputation of 5 studies, reducing the effect (g=0.16, 
95% CI 0.03-0.28, Q=29.9).  Orwin’s fail-safe N indicated that 17 studies with a zero effect 
would have to exist unpublished to reduce the effect size of Study 2 to a trivial g=0.10. 
Summary of Study 2 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Blood lipid profiles and omega-3 supplementation for ADHD 
14 
 
The beneficial effects of n-3 supplementation replicated across parent and teacher 
report at an effect size just shy of 1/4 of a standard deviation, with a confidence interval from 
0.15 to 0.37, but were slightly more reliable for hyperactivity than for inattention and slightly 
inflated by possible publication bias.

## Clinical Significance
conclusions.

## References
references and Tables): 5,033...
---
