---
# milte2013
**Autores**: Not specified
**Año**: 2013
**Journal**: Scientific Paper
**DOI/Link**: N/A

## Abstract
Abstract
Objective: To investigate effects of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFA) docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) and 
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) on attention, literacy, and behavior in children with ADHD. Method: Ninety children were 
randomized to consume supplements high in EPA, DHA, or linoleic acid (control) for 4 months each in a crossover design. 
Erythrocyte fatty acids, attention, cognition, literacy, and Conners’ Parent Rating Scales (CPRS) were measured at 0, 4, 8, 
12 months.

## Key Findings
Discussion
This 12-month three-way crossover trial compared the 
effects of supplementation with the long-chain n-3 PUFAs 
EPA and DHA with the n-6 PUFA LA on literacy, attention 
and behavior in children with ADHD with and without 
learning difficulties. We found no differences in treatment 
effects between groups. However, when we investigated via 
regression analysis correlations between increased erythro-
cyte levels of n-3 and n-6 PUFAs and outcome measures, 
we found a number of significant associations: that is, 
increased levels of n-3 PUFAs (most consistently EPA + 
DHA together) were associated with improved literacy, 
attention, and parent-rated behavior, while there were nega-
tive associations between increased n-6 PUFA levels and 
various outcome variables. Accordingly, reduction in the 
ratio of n-6:n-3 was a consistent predictor of improved 
outcomes.
When we had analyzed the first 4 months as a parallel 
design (Milte et al., 2012), we similarly found no significant 
d... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
methodology between stud-
ies, such as diagnostic criteria (Polanczyk, Silva de Lima, 
Bernardo, Biederman, & Rohde, 2007). There is often an 
overlap between ADHD symptoms and other disorders, 
such as conduct and/or mood disorders (Root & Resnick, 
2003) and learning disorders (Mayes, Calhoun, & Crowell, 
2000), with at least a quarter of children with ADHD having 
a comorbid learning disorder (Mayes et al., 2000).
The etiology of ADHD and comorbid disorders has 
genetic and environmental components. Among these, there 
is evidence for a role of nutrition and diet (Sinn, 2008). In 
particular, omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFA) 
have received increasing attention for their role in mental 
health since the discovery of the high concentration of the 
long-chain n-3 PUFA, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) in the 
mammalian brain (Crawford & Sinclair, 1971; Sinclair & 
Crawford, 1972) and its role in a range of important related 
functions in the brain including increased membrane fluidity 
and neurotransmission (Haag, 2003). Eicosapentaenoic acid 
(EPA) is a long-chain n-3 PUFA precursor to DHA and has 
important roles including the production of prostaglandins. 
510562 JADXXX10.1177/1087054713510562Journal of Attention DisordersMilte et al.
research-article2013
1Deakin University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
2University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia
3Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia
4University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia
Corresponding Author:
Natalie Parletta, School of Population Health, University of South 
Australia, G.P.O. Box 2471, Adelaide, SA 5001, Australia. 
Email: natalie.parletta@unisa.edu.au
Increased Erythrocyte Eicosapentaenoic 
Acid and Docosahexaenoic Acid Are 
Associated With Improved Attention 
and Behavior in Children With ADHD 
in a Randomized Controlled Three-Way 
Crossover Trial
Catherine M. Milte1, Natalie Parletta2, Jonathan D. Buckley2, Alison M. Coates2, 
Ross M. Young3, and Peter R. C. Howe4

## Results
Results: Fifty-three children completed the treatment. Outcome measures showed no significant differences 
between the three treatments. However, in children with blood samples (n = 76-46), increased erythrocyte EPA + DHA 
was associated with improved spelling (r = .365, p < .001) and attention (r = −.540, p < .001) and reduced oppositional 
behavior (r = −.301, p < .003), hyperactivity (r = −.310, p < .001), cognitive problems (r = −.326, p < .001), Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed.; DSM-IV) hyperactivity (r = −.270, p = .002) and DSM-IV inattention (r = 
−.343, p < .001).

## Clinical Significance
Conclusion: Increasing erythrocyte DHA and EPA via dietary supplementation may improve behavior, 
attention, and literacy in children with ADHD. (J. of Att. Dis. XXXX; XX(X) XX-XX)
Keywords
ADD/ADHD, behavior, cognition, fatty acid, nutrition
 at Bobst Library, New York University on May 27, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
2	
Journal of Attention Disorders XX(X)
However, its role in brain function is unclear as its concentra-
tion in the brain is much lower than DHA.
The essential fatty acids n-3 PUFA must be obtained in 
the diet, and yet their consumption, primarily due to a 
reduced intake of dark leafy vegetables, nuts, seeds, and oily 
fish, has declined in modern diets. Concurrently, consump-
tion of omega-6 (n-6) PUFA, from vegetable oils and pro-
cessed foods, has increased. This has resulted in an estimated 
altered ratio of n-6:n-3 intake from 1:1 in traditional diets to 
15-16:1 in modern diets (Simopoulos, 2002). n-3 PUFA 
have a variety of roles in body and brain function, including 
anti-inflammatory, antithrombotic, and vasodilatory func-
tions whereas n-6 PUFA increase inflammation, thrombosis, 
and vasoconstriction. Hence, an altered ratio in favor of n-6 
is likely to result in increased inflammation and reduced 
blood flow, which may occur not only peripherally but also 
in the brain and thereby potentially adversely affect mental 
health (McAfoose & Baune, 2009; Sinn & Howe, 2008).
A growing body of studies has investigated effects of 
n-3 PUFA on mental illness (Sinn, Milte, & Howe, 2010), 
including effects on learning and behavior problems asso-
ciated with ADHD in children (Hirayama, Hamazaki, & 
Terasawa, 2004; Johnson, Östlund, Fransson, Kadesjö, 
& Gillberg, 2008; Milte et al., 2012; Richardson & 
Montgomery, 2005; Sinn & Bryan, 2007; Sinn, Bryan, 
& Wilson, 2008; Stevens et al., 2003; Voigt et al., 2001). 
Overall, these studies have found significant improve-
ments in learning and behavior with an increased intake of 
n-3 PUFA, and it may be concluded from the body of work 
that EPA is more effective than DHA (Bloch & Qawasmi, 
2011). However, there are methodological issues that may 
account for the apparent benefit of EPA over DHA. For 
instance, while two studies used pure DHA and showed no 
benefit for learning and behavior (Hirayama et al., 2004; 
Voigt et al., 2001), Hirayama et al. (2004) conducted their 
study in Japanese children who have one of the highest 
intakes of fish and are therefore less likely to have low 
levels of n-3 PUFA; Voigt et al. (2001) recruited boys who 
were taking stimulant medication, and accordingly, 
T-scores of parent ratings at baseline were already in the 
normal range, thereby limiting the potential for improve-
ment to be detected. Studies that have found positive 
effects of n-3 PUFA used fish oil with a naturally occur-
ring high ratio of EPA to DHA (3:1); however, the positive 
outcomes may be attributable, at least to some degree, to 
the DHA component of the supplement and also to meth-
odological attributes in those studies such as sufficient 
dosage, medication-naïve samples, and duration of sup-
plementation over 12 weeks or more.
Another interesting observation from these studies is the 
range of diagnoses that were included. In Richardson and 
Montgomery 
(2005), 
children 
with 
Developmental 
Coordination Disorder were recruited, of which a third had 
ADHD symptoms in the clinical range and the whole sample 
were on average a year behind in reading and spelling. This 
study found highly significant improvements on teacher rat-
ings of attention and behavior on Conners’ Teacher Rating 
Scales and reading and spelling. Johnson et al. (2008) 
reported the strongest responders, in their sample of children 
and adolescents diagnosed with ADHD, in the subgroup 
with learning disorders.
We therefore recruited children with ADHD symptoms 
and parent-reported learning difficulties to investigate the 
relative efficacy of EPA versus DHA for improving behav-
ioral and learning outcomes and measured erythrocyte (red 
blood cell) membrane fatty acids. As reported previously, in 
baseline regression analyses for participants who provided 
blood samples (n = 75), we found that higher n-3 PUFA 
predicted lower anxiety/shyness, higher DHA predicted 
better word reading, and higher n-6 PUFA levels predicted 
poorer reading, vocabulary, spelling, and attention. We dis-
covered following reading and spelling assessments that 
36% were behind their age level in both, whom we classi-
fied as having learning difficulties. Comparisons between 
those with and without learning difficulties showed that the 
former had significantly lower levels of erythrocyte DHA 
(Milte, Sinn, Buckley, et al., 2011). We also reported previ-
ously that following 4 months of supplementation with fish 
oil high in EPA or DHA or safflower oil control (containing 
n-6 PUFA linoleic acid [LA]), we found no significant dif-
ferences in outcome measures between these groups; how-
ever, in those with blood samples, increased erythrocyte 
DHA was associated with improved word reading and lower 
parent ratings of oppositional behavior. In the subgroup 
with learning difficulties (n = 17), these effects were stron-
ger: Increased DHA was associated with improved word 
reading, spelling, attention, and lower parental ratings of 
oppositional behavior, hyperactivity, restlessness, and over-
all ADHD symptoms (Milte et al., 2012).
The latter results were reported from the first 4 months 
of the present 12-month study, which is the focus of this 
article. This study aimed to investigate the effects of supple-
mentation with EPA-rich or DHA-rich fish oil versus 
LA-rich safflower oil on behavior, attention, and literacy 
over 12 months in a randomized three-way crossover trial. 
Relationships between erythrocyte PUFA status and out-
come measures over each phase of the trial were also 
investigated.
Method
A 12-month randomized controlled three-way crossover trial 
in children aged 6 to 13 years with ADHD symptoms was 
conducted in Adelaide and Brisbane, Australia, approved by 
the Human Research Ethics Committees of the University of 
South Australia and Queensland University of Technology. 
The trial was registered with the Australian New Zealand 
Clinical Trials Registry (ACTRN12607000332426).
 at Bobst Library, New York University on May 27, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
Milte et al.	
3
Participants
Children were eligible to participate if they had a diagnosis 
of ADHD or parent-rated symptoms >90th percentile on the 
Conners’ Parent Rating Scale (CPRS; Conners, 2000) and 
parent-reported learning difficulties (described as literacy 
performance behind their year level at school). Children 
were excluded if they had consumed n-3 PUFA supple-
ments during the 3 months prior to the study or were taking 
any ADHD medication. Required sample size, to provide 
>80% power to detect a medium effect size (Cohen, 1992) 
while allowing for a 30% drop-out rate, was estimated at 
120 participants.
Procedure
All recruitment and assessments occurred between June 
2007 and June 2009. Figure 1 shows the flow of participants 
through the study. Children were recruited through media 
releases and television interviews, newspaper advertise-
ments, school newsletters, and flyers. A total of 199 chil-
dren were assessed for eligibility after responses to the calls 
for volunteers. Information sheets and consent forms were 
sent to interested parents and guardians of 115 children who 
were deemed eligible through a brief screening interview 
over the phone. If they did not have an official diagnosis of 
ADHD, parents were asked to complete the ADHD index, a 
Assessed for eligibility 
(n=199) 
Excluded(n=103)
♦Not meeting inclusion criteria (n=12)
♦Declined to participate (n=91) 
Lost to follow-up (n= 3)
Discontinued intervention (n=30)
♦Refused capsules (n=15)
♦Commenced medica
on/ ﬁsh oil (n=10)
♦Refused aendance (n=2)
♦Moved away (n=1)
♦Unknown (n=2)
Allocated to intervention (n=96)
♦Received allocated intervention (n=90)
♦Did not receive allocated intervention (n=6)
Analysed (n=87)
♦Excluded from analysis (n=3)
no ADHD diagnosis
Allocation
Analysis
Follow-Up
Randomized (n=96)
Enrollment
Figure 1.  Flowchart showing movement of children through the study.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on May 27, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
4	
Journal of Attention Disorders XX(X)
12-item subscale from the CPRS, to determine whether 
children were rated >90th percentile (Conners, 2000). The 
study was explained to children and their parent(s) or guard-
ian and written informed consent was obtained.
While 96 children were recruited to the study, 6 children 
withdrew before completion of baseline assessment, leaving a 
total of 90 study volunteers. Children were independently 
allocated to one of three treatment conditions using the pro-
cess of randomization by minimization (Altman & Bland, 
2005) on the basis of age and gender. Each condition received 
the two omega-3 rich oils (EPA-rich and DHA-rich) and con-
trol oil (LA-rich) for 4 months each, so the three treatment 
conditions comprised EPA-DHA-LA, DHA-LA-EPA, or 
LA-EPA-DHA. The period of 4 months was chosen for each 
supplementation period as erythrocyte PUFA concentration is 
reported to reach a steady state after 4 to 6 months (Arterburn, 
Hall, & Oken, 2006). Furthermore, erythrocyte PUFA levels 
reportedly return to baseline 16 weeks following cessation of 
supplementation (Cao, Schwichtenberg, Hanson, & Tsai, 
2006). Therefore, no washout period was included as it was 
assumed that washout of the previous treatment would have 
occurred during the following supplementation period. Study 
investigators involved in recruitment and data collection, and 
parents and children were blinded to the randomization until 
completion of data collection and analysis. Children visited 
the Nutritional Physiology Research Centre at the University 
of South Australia (Adelaide, Australia; n = 52) or the Institute 
of Health and Biomedical Innovation (Brisbane, Australia; n 
= 38) with their parents or guardians at baseline and after 4, 8, 
and 12 months. Capsule containers were returned by parents 
at each visit for compliance assessment by capsule counting. 
At each visit, fasted blood samples were collected into 6 ml 
EDTA tubes by venepuncture. After the blood sample, chil-
dren were given a small snack (toast and fruit juice or water) 
and underwent 30 to 45 min of cognitive assessments. All 
researchers were trained in the assessment tasks by the same 
person initially, and the same instructions and protocol were 
used for each volunteer’s assessments. Between each visit, 
parents were contacted via phone or email at least 3 times (at 
4, 10, and 15 weeks) by researchers to reduce dropouts, infor-
mally check compliance, and report any adverse events.
Supplements
Based on previous reports of improved symptoms in chil-
dren following supplementation with 750 mg total long-
chain n-3 PUFAs/day (Richardson & Montgomery, 2005; 
Sinn & Bryan, 2007) and considering that compliance is 
variable in children, we chose to supplement with at least 1 
g long-chain n-3 PUFA/day to achieve an optimal response. 
Participants consumed 4 × 500 mg capsules per day con-
taining the following daily dose during the respective treat-
ment conditions: EPA-rich fish oil, providing a total of 
1,109 mg EPA and 108 mg DHA; DHA-rich fish oil, 
providing 264 mg EPA and 1,032 mg DHA; or safflower oil 
(control), providing 1,467 mg LA per day. All oils were sta-
bilized with a low concentration of Vitamin E. Capsules 
were provided by Novasel Australia.
Assessment Tools
Primary outcomes: Literacy and behavior.  Literacy was 
assessed using the word reading and spelling subtests from 
the Wechsler Individual Achievement Test–III (WIAT-III; 
Wechsler, 1992). Performance on the vocabulary subtest 
from the Wechsler Scale of Children’s Intelligence–III 
(WISC-III; Wechsler, 1991) was also assessed. Raw scores 
were converted to age-scaled scores. Parent ratings of 
ADHD symptoms were assessed by completion of the 
CPRS–Long Version (Conners, 2000).
Secondary outcomes: Attention and inhibition.  Different forms 
of attention were assessed as a secondary outcome measure 
using an abbreviated test battery from the TEA-ch (Manly, 
Robertson, & Anderson, 1999). Focused attention was mea-
sured using Sky Search, a timed subtest in which children 
are asked to circle as many “target” spaceships as they can 
on a sheet filled with similar distracter spaceships. In Part 2, 
they are timed while they circle as many as they can without 
distracters. The second time is subtracted from the first time 
to eliminate effects of motor slowness. Score! measures the 
ability to sustain attention during a relatively simple non-
stimulating task by asking children to keep count of the 
number of “scoring” sounds they hear on a tape. Creature 
Counting measures the ability to switch and control atten-
tion. In this test, children are asked to count creatures in a 
burrow, and when they come to an arrow, they must switch 
their counting up or down according to the direction of the 
arrow. Sky Search DT measures divided attention by asking 
children to combine the Sky Search and Score! tasks.
Inhibition, or the ability to hold back a response, was 
assessed using a computerized Go/No-go task (Trommer, 
Hoeppner, Lorber, & Armstrong, 1988). This task involved 
pressing the “h” key to respond to predefined stimuli on a 
computer screen (e.g., a green man) and to withhold the 
response and press the spacebar instead when a specific 
stimulus appears (e.g., a red man). In this task, 171 green 
men were presented with 45 red men randomly dispersed 
among them. Number of errors was calculated as a measure 
of response inhibition.
While the children were completing these tasks, parents/
guardians completed the CPRS and questionnaires that col-
lected information about child and parent demographics.
Assessment of Fatty Acid Profiles
Relative proportions of individual fatty acids in erythrocyte 
phospholipids were assessed as described previously (Milte, 
 at Bobst Library, New York University on May 27, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
Milte et al.	
5
Sinn, Street, et al., 2011). Erythrocytes were isolated within 
2 hr of collection by centrifugation, washed in isotonic 
saline, and stored at −80 °C. Erythrocytes were thawed and 
the lipids extracted and transesterified. The resultant fatty 
acid methyl esters were separated and quantified using a 
Shimadzu 2010 gas chromatograph equipped with a 50m 
capillary column (0.32 mm ID) coated with BPX-70 (.25 
µm film thickness, SGE Pty Ltd. Victoria, Australia). 
Retention times were compared with those of authentic 
lipid standards (GLC-463, Nu-Chek Prep Inc. Elysian, 
Minnesota, USA) for identification.
Statistical Assessment
Data analysis was conducted using SPSS Statistics (version 
17.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois, USA). Effects of EPA and 
DHA versus LA (control) supplementation on outcome vari-
ables were investigated using linear mixed modeling. 
Relationships between erythrocyte PUFA status over the 12 
months and literacy, cognition, and behavior were assessed 
using within-subject regression. Erythrocyte EPA, DHA, 
EPA + DHA, total n-3 PUFA, total n-6 PUFA, and n-6/n-3 
ratio at baseline and after EPA, DHA, and LA supplementa-
tion were investigated. Each PUFA was entered as a predictor 
variable into an individual regression analysis (e.g., DHA vs. 
word reading score, total n-3 PUFA vs. word reading score, 
etc.). Within-subject regression analysis was repeated for 
each PUFA and outcome variable. A modified Bonferroni 
adjustment was used to correct for multiple comparisons.
These two statistical techniques were selected as they 
allowed volunteers with missing data or dropouts to be 
included in the analysis. The significance level was set at 
p < .05. The pattern of missing data was determined using 
Little’s MCAR test (1988).
Results
Descriptive Statistics
Of the 90 children aged 6 to 13 years who commenced the 
study (52 at University of South Australia; 38 at Queensland 
University of Technology), 3 were excluded from analysis 
and are not reported further due to lack of ADHD diagnosis 
or symptom severity scores below the 90th percentile on 
Conners’ global scale. Blood samples were obtained from 
75 volunteers at baseline. There was no difference in ratings 
of ADHD symptom severity on the Conners’ scale between 
those who provided blood samples and those who did not. 
Forty three children (50%) had an official, parent-reported 
diagnosis of ADHD. There were no differences in ratings of 
ADHD symptom severity between those with and without 
an official diagnosis. Seventy percent had word reading 
scores below their age level, 79% performed behind their 
age level in spelling, and 91% in vocabulary.
See Table 1 for an outline of demographic variables at 
baseline. Further details regarding the sample have been 
reported elsewhere (Milte et al., 2012).
Adverse Events
Twelve instances of minor adverse events were reported 
over the 12 months. During the LA (control) treatment, one 
volunteer reported bad breath and one reported gastrointes-
tinal symptoms. During the EPA treatment, one volunteer 
reported itchy skin and two each reported bad breath and 
gastrointestinal symptoms. Five children during the DHA 
treatment each reported one of the following: gastrointesti-
nal symptoms, unpleasant taste, nose bleed, skin rash and 
yellow teeth.
Blinding
Parents were asked at the end of each treatment condition 
whether they thought that children had received an active or 
placebo treatment during the previous 4 months, and the rea-
son. Overall, about 40% of completers correctly guessed 
whether they were taking an active or placebo supplement 
(41% on EPA, 48% on DHA, and 38% for LA). The primary 
reason volunteers reported correctly guessing which supple-
ment they were on was that they were/were not deriving 
benefits from the respective treatment. While taking EPA 
and DHA, only two volunteers each correctly guessed the 
supplement they were taking due to a reported “fishy” taste; 
therefore, treatment blinding was considered successful.
Completers and Compliance
A total of 33 children (37%) discontinued the intervention 
over the 12 months (Figure 1). Data were available for 56 
Table 1.  Baseline Descriptive Statistics (n = 87).
Age
8.91 (1.729)
Male, n (%)
67 (77)
Birth weight (kg)
5.30 (2.34)
Parent-rated healtha
4.11 (0.81)
Number of weeks breastfed
21.7 (28.5)
Length of gestation (weeks)
39.2 (3.27)
Level of primary parent’s education, n (%)
  Grade 10
26 (29.9)
  SACE/matriculation
17 (19.5)
  TAFE certificate
19 (21.8)
  University diploma/degree
20 (22.9)
  Postgraduate degree
1 (1.1)
  Unknown
4 (4.6)
Note. Parametric data presented as M (SD). SACE = South Australian 
Certificate of Further Education; TAFE = Technical and Further Education
aRated on a scale 1 = poor; 5 = excellent.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on May 27, 2015
jad.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
6	
Journal of Attention Disorders XX(X)
children after consuming EPA, 54 after DHA and 57 after 
LA. Mean (SD) compliance was 83% (17), 86% (14), and 
85% (17) by capsule counts for EPA, DHA, and LA, respec-
tively. However, there was a large variation in compliance 
(20%-100%) over the study. Blood samples were obtained 
for 50 children after EPA supplementation, 45 after DHA 
supplementation, and 46 after LA supplementation and were 
analyzed for erythrocyte PUFA content. Mean changes in 
erythrocyte n-3 and n-6 PUFAs reflected the expected 
changes due to the supplement in each respective phase 
(Table 2). However, it can be seen from this table that after 
the LA control condition, blood n-3 PUFA levels did not go 
completely back to their baseline values.
Primary Analysis
There were 58 missing observations in the demographic data 
and 25 missing observations in the baseline data due to incom-
plete questionnaires or inability to complete the cognitive test. 
Birth weight had the most missing values (43%). In the follow-
up data, there were 2,632 missing observations; a mean of 35 
missing observations per variable. The majority of missing 
data was due to dropouts and the remainder due to incomplete 
questionnaires or inability to complete cognitive tests. Analysis 
using Little’s MCAR test showed that data were likely to be 
missing completely at random. The application of a linear mul-
tilevel model was therefore appropriate for this missing pat-
tern. Analysis of treatment effects on outcome variables 
between the three groups was conducted using unstructured 
linear mixed effects modeling and therefore taking all 87 cases 
into consideration. There were no significant treatment effects 
for literacy, cognition, or parent-reported behavior (Table 3).
Associations Between Changes in Erythrocyte 
PUFA and Changes in Outcome Variables
Within-subject regression analysis was used to investigate 
relationships between erythrocyte PUFA status and outcome 
measures at baseline and after supplementation with EPA, 
DHA, and LA. The PUFAs EPA, DHA, EPA + DHA, total 
n-3 PUFA, total n-6 PUFA, and n-6:n-3 ratio were investi-
gated (Tables 4 and 5). Within-subject changes in erythrocyte 
PUFA were associated with improvements in literacy, atten-
tion, and behavior. Particularly, increases in erythrocyte EPA, 
DHA, and total n-3 PUFA and decreases in erythrocyte n-6 
and the n-6:n-3 ratio were associated with improvements. 
EPA + DHA (i.e., the Omega-3 Index (Harris & von Schacky, 
2004)) and n-6:n-3 PUFA ratio gave the most consistent cor-
relations. Outcome measures most commonly improved 
included overall literacy (word reading and spelling) atten-
tion (Sky Search and Creature Counting) and subscales of 
parent-rated behavior through the CPRS.

## References
References
Altman, D. G., & Bland, J. M. (2005). Treatment allocation by 
minimisation. British Medical Journal, 330, 843.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statis-
tical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: 
Author.
Arterburn, L. M., Hall, E. B., & Oken, H. (2006). Distribution, 
interconversion, and dose response of n-3 fatty acids in 
humans. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 83(Suppl. 
6), 1467S-1476S.
Bloch, M. H., & Qawasmi, A. (2011). Omega-3 ...
---
