---
# Which polyunsaturated fatty acids are active in children with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder receiving PUFA supplementation? A fatty acid validated meta-regression analysis of randomized controlled trials
**Autores**: Basant K. Puri
**Año**: 2013
**Journal**: Prostaglandins Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids, 90 + (2014) 179-189. doi:10.1016/j.plefa.2014.01.004
**DOI/Link**: ADHD; DPA; EPA; GLA; Meta-analysis; Meta-regression

## Abstract
Not found

## Key Findings
Discussion and conclusions
We found that PUFA supplementation was associated with a
small decrease in combined ADHD symptoms and that GLA plus
the interaction between GLA and EPA was effective for inattention
symptoms.
Signiﬁcant pooled effects were found for parent ratings but not
for teacher or clinician ratings. This might have resulted from a
failure of blinding to group status during the trials as only a few
studies assessed blinding success. A recent meta-analysis examin-
ing both dietary and psychological interventions for ADHD also
found a greater likelihood of signiﬁcant results if symptoms were
rated by those closest to the therapeutic setting [29]. An alter-
native explanation is that parents may be better at discerning
subtle behavioral changes in their children than are teachers.
Regarding the univariable meta-regression, longer study dura-
tion, EDA and DGLA dose were found to be signiﬁcantly associated
with a decrease in combined ADHD symptoms. We did not ﬁnd a
univariab... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
Methods
2.1. Search strategy
Articles were identiﬁed for inclusion in the meta-analysis using
the following search strategy with no speciﬁc start date. The
PubMed database was searched using the following MeSH and
free terms:
((“Attention Deﬁcit Disorder with Hyperactivity”[Mesh] OR “atten-
tion deﬁcit”[All Fields] OR “hyperactivity”[All Fields] OR “inattentio-
n”[All Fields] OR “impulsivity”[All Fields] OR “ADHD”[All Fields]) AND
(“Fatty Acids, Essential”[Mesh] OR “Fatty Acids, Omega-3”[Mesh] OR
“Fish Oils”[Mesh] OR “Eicosapentaenoic Acid”[Mesh] OR “Docosahex-
aenoic Acids”[Mesh] OR “fatty acids”[All Fields] OR “essential fatty
acids”[All Fields] OR “ﬁsh oil”[All Fields] OR “polyunsaturated”[All
Fields] OR “eicosapentaenoic”[All Fields] OR “docosahexaenoic”[All
FIelds])) AND (“Clinical Trial”[Publication Type] OR “treatment”[All
Fields] OR “administration”[All Fields] OR “randomized”[All Fields] OR
“randomised”[All Fields] OR “placebo”[All Fields] OR “trial”[All Fields]
OR “study”[All Fields]) AND (“children”[All Fields] OR “adolescents”[All
Fields] OR “child”[All Fields] OR “adolescent”[All Fields])
The Ovid platform was also employed to search the EMBASE
and psycINFO databases using the following terms:
(attention deﬁcit OR hyperactivity OR impulsivity OR ADHD) AND
(treatment OR administration OR randomized OR randomised OR
placebo OR trial OR study) AND (children OR adolescents OR child OR
adolescent) AND (fatty acids OR essential fatty acids OR ﬁsh oil OR
polyunsaturated OR eicosapentaenoic OR docosahexaenoic).
As of the 28th July 2013, 146 abstracts were identiﬁed from the
PubMed search, and 1259 abstracts were identiﬁed from the
EMBASE and psycINFO databases, giving a total of 1129 abstracts
after duplicates were removed.
From the combined PubMed and Ovid searches, 32 abstracts
were selected for examination of the full citation on the basis of
the following inclusion criteria: (i) randomized design; (ii) placebo
controlled; (iii) use of a PUFA preparation as active intervention;
and (iv) reporting sufﬁcient statistical

## Results
results on changes in scores
of a validated rating-scale measure of ADHD symptoms in
response to intervention. Studies were included if they reported
changes in ADHD symptoms in children and/or adolescents with a
formal diagnosis of ADHD or without (for example, dyslexia,
developmental coordination disorder, or reading impairment in
otherwise normal children). Studies examining changes in ADHD
symptoms in children and/or adolescents with autistic spectrum
disorders were excluded.
Of these 32 full citations, 18 citations were identiﬁed that
described studies that could be subjected to meta-analytic review
(one placebo-controlled trial, although not described as rando-
mized in the study report, was conﬁrmed as randomized by the
author [30] and was therefore included) and 14 citations were
excluded (see PRISMA ﬂow diagram in Supplementary eFig. 1).
Reasons for exclusion were as follows; 1, not randomized [31];
1, not placebo-controlled [32]; 3, open-label [33–35]; 2, letters
related to primary publication [36,37]; 1, results reported as
median values and despite contacting the corresponding author
no mean and standard deviation values could be obtained [38];
1, in adults [39]; 2, reported cognitive function tests only [40,41];
1, no rating of hyperactivity or inattention [42]; 1, reporting fatty
acid proﬁles related to an earlier randomized controlled trial [43];
and 1, no data presented for numbers of patients in each treat-
ment group [44]. Of note, our selection strategy identiﬁed all
studies included in a recent Cochrane systematic review [28],
which employed a more extensive search strategy of multiple
databases. Therefore, despite the simplicity of the present search
strategy, it is unlikely that signiﬁcant studies have been missed.
The characteristics of the ﬁnal 18 included studies are shown in
Table 1.
2.2. Outcome measures
ADHD rating scales were chosen as meta-analytic outcomes
rather than neuropsychological tests of attention or impulsivity,
because neuropsychological tests were employed less frequently
and more variably than rating scales to have allowed for reliable
B.K. Puri, J.G. Martins / Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 90 (2014) 179–189
180
Table 1
Characteristics of the 18 included studies listed chronologically according to e-publication date or publication date, whichever was earlier.
Study
[reference]
Clinical
disorder
Number,
total (FA/
placebo)
Mean
age
(y)
%
Male
Fatty acid
preparation
(manufacturer)
Reported daily
fatty acid regimen(s)
(use as adjunctive,
monotherapy or mixed)
Placebo
content
Duration
(days)
Outcome
measure
Rater
(missing)
Quality
score
Trial
registration
Aman et al. [30]
ADHD
31 (31/31)a
8.9
87.1
Efamol (Efamol Ltd, UK)
2.160 g LAþ0.270 g GLA
(monotherapy)
Liquid parafﬁn
28
ACTeRS
Teacher
4
No
Connersb
Teacher
RBPC
Parent
Arnold et al.
[54]
ADHD
18 (18/18)a
9
100
Efamol (Efamol Ltd, UK)
2.800 g LAþ0.320 g GLA
(monotherapy)
Liquid parafﬁn
28
Connersc
Teacher
(Parent)
3
No
Voigt et al. [56]
ADHD
63 (32/31)
9.3
77.7
DHASCO
(Martek Biosciences Inc., USA)
0.345 g DHA (adjunctive)
Not stated
120
CBCL
Parent
7
No
Connersc
(Parent)
Richardson and
Puri [65]
Dyslexia
41 (22/19)
10.3
85.4
Efalex (Efamol Ltd, UK)
0.186 g EPAþ0.480 g
DHAþ0.096 g GLAþ0.864 g
LAþ0.042 g AA (monotherapy)
Olive oil
84
Connersd
Parent
8
No
Stevens et al.
[66]
ADHD
47 (25/22)
9.8
87.2
Efalex (Efamol Ltd, UK)
0.080 g EPAþ0.480 g DHA
þ0.096 g GLAþ0.040 g AA
(mixed)
Olive oil
120
Connerse
Parent
9
No
Teacher
DBD
Parent
Teacher
Hirayama et al.
[45]
ADHD
40 (20/20)
9.0
80.0
DHA-enriched food
0.100 g EPAþ0.514 g
DHA (mixed)
Non-enriched
food
60
DSM-IV
symptom
count
Parent/
Teacherf
6
No
Richardson and
Montgomery
[63]
DCD
117 (60/57)
8.8
66.7
eye q (Equazen, UK)
0.558 g EPAþ0.174 g DHA
þ0.060 g GLA (monotherapy)
Olive oil
90
Connersg
Teacher
8
No
Sinn and Bryan
[55]
ADHD
104 (77/27)
9.4
74.0
eye q (Equazen, UK)
0.558 g EPAþ0.174 g
DHAþ0.060 g GLA
(monotherapy)
Palm oil
105
Connersh
Parent
(Teacher)
4
No
Johnson et al.
[67]
ADHD
75 (37/38)
12.0
85.3
eye q (Equazen, UK)
0.558 g EPAþ0.174 g
DHAþ0.060 g GLA
(monotherapy)
Olive oil
90
ADHD-RS
Clinician
8
Yes NCT01219309
Vaisman et al.
[68]
ADHD
83 (29, 28/
26)
9.3
75.0
Omega-3 FA-enriched
phospholipids (Enzymotec Ltd,
Israel) OR, Fish oil (Ocean
Nutrition, Canada)
See Table 2 (monotherapy)
Rapeseed oil
90
Connerse
Parent
7
No
Kairaluoma
et al. [69]
Dyslexia
61 (30/31)
11.1
57.4
Ethyl-EPA (Oy Bio-Vita AB,
Finland)
0.500 g EPAþ0.400 g
Carnosine (monotherapy)
Triglycerides
þcellulose
90
CBCL
Teacher
7
No
Raz et al. [46]
ADHD
78 (39/39)
10.5
60.3
Essential FAs
(TransCulture, Japan)
0.480 g LAþ0.120 g ALA
(monotherapy)
Vitamin C
49
AHDH-RS
Parent
6
No
Connerse
Parent
Teacher
Bélanger et al.
[47]
ADHD
26 (13/13)a
9.2
69.2
ABC2 (NutriSanté, Canada)
20–25 mg/kg EPA
þ8.5–10.5 mg/kg DHA
(monotherapy)
Sunﬂower oil
56
Connersd,g
Parent
(Teacher)
5
No
Gustaffson et al.
[70]
ADHD
109 (57/52)
7–12
80.4
PlusEPA (Minami Nutrition,
Belgium)
0.500 g EPAþ0.0027 g DHA
(monotherapy)
Rapeseed
oilþmedium-
chain triglycerides
105
Connersi
Parent
9
No
Teacher
Manor et al.
[71]
ADHD
200 (137/
63)
9.2
70.7
Vayarin (Enzymotec Ltd., Israel)
0.086 g EPAþ0.034 g
DHAþ0.300 g
Phosphatidylserine
(monotherapy)
Cellulose (ﬁsh
odorized)
105
Connersh
Parent
9
Yes
Teacher
NCT00418184
Milte et al. [72]
ADHD
87 (30, 28/
29)
8.9
79.3
EPA-rich ﬁsh oil OR,
DHA-rich ﬁsh oil (Novasel
Australia Pty Ltd.)
1.109 g EPAþ0.108 g DHA OR,
0.254 g EPAþ1.032 g DHA
(monotherapy)
LA-rich safﬂower
oil
120
Connersh
Parent
10
Yes
Teacher
ACTRN12607000332426
B.K. Puri, J.G. Martins / Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 90 (2014) 179–189
181
pooling of data across studies. Inattention and hyperactive-impul-
sive subscales of ADHD rating scales could be reliably obtained
from most studies, rated either by both parents and teachers or by
either parents or teachers (in some studies a clinician rated
symptoms instead of a teacher). A list of outcome measures
employed is shown in Table 1.
Individual corresponding authors were contacted to provide as
much missing data as possible; means and standard deviations were
obtained for the Hirayama et al. study that quoted median values
[45]; parent ratings for the Conners' Abbreviated Parent-Teacher
questionnaire were obtained for the Raz et al. study [46]; means and
standard deviations were obtained for the Bélanger et al. study that
used mean percent change from baseline without a measure of
variation [47]; raw data were provided for re-analysis from the
Perera et al. study whose published effect size conﬁdence interval
values contained errors [48]. The authors of this last study also
provided the English translation of the ADHD questionnaire used in
the study [49], enabling scales for inattention and hyperactive-
impulsive symptoms to be constructed. In a recent Cochrane review
examining PUFA supplementation in ADHD [28], the study by Aman
et al. [30] was excluded because the outcome variable contained no
variation; however, we were able to compute an effect size from the
published F statistic.
2.3. Moderator variables
Baseline symptoms, study duration, study sample size, study
quality, and individual fatty acid doses were employed as potential
moderating variables.
Baseline symptoms scores were constructed by calculating
t-scores for all rating scales across studies using published norma-
tive values and prorated according to the age and sex distribution of
each individual study. One study used raw DSM-IV symptom counts
as a measure of ADHD symptoms [45]; in the absence of normative
data to obtain a t-score, the baseline value for this study was
imputed as the mean of all other values. One study quoted SNAP-IV
baseline mean values for combined ADHD symptoms as 2.62 (range
1.89–4.00) when the maximum score for this outcome measure is
3 [50]. The authors of this latter study were contacted and provided
the raw baseline data, which showed that the 4-point Likert scale
had been scored from 1–4 instead of 0–3. The mean baseline value
was recalculated using the conventional 0–3 scoring system.
Methodological study quality was assessed using the Jadad
score [51] plus 7 additional components: (i) whether similarities in
baseline characteristics were adequately described; (ii) whether
attempts were made to conceal the ﬁsh taste of the active interven-
tion; (iii) whether the outcome assessors were adequately blinded;
(iv) whether all available data were reported; (v) whether data were
analyzed according to intention-to-treat (ITT) methods; (vi) whether
compliance was assessed through measurement of erythrocyte or
plasma fatty acids; and (vii) whether blinding success was evaluated.
This gave a maximum possible quality score of 12.
Individual PUFA doses were calculated for all precursor fatty
acids from linoleic acid (LA) up to and including arachidonic acid
(AA) constituting the omega-6 pathway, and all precursor fatty
acids from α-linolenic acid (ALA) up to and including EPA and DHA
constituting the omega-3 pathway, by conducting independent
FAME analyses of all PUFA regimens, except where the detailed
fatty acid content of the PUFA regimen was already published. FAME
analyses were conducted by Eclipse ALS, Cambridge, UK. This
approach conferred two major advantages. First, it gave a more
reliable assessment of the precise PUFA content of the regimens; for
example, some studies reported just one or two PUFAs that were
considered relevant by the investigators and others gave a full PUFA
proﬁle. Second, it enabled us to conduct meta-regression analyses
with no prior assumption as to which PUFA might be active or
Table 1 (continued )
Study
[reference]
Clinical
disorder
Number,
total (FA/
placebo)
Mean
age
(y)
%
Male
Fatty acid
preparation
(manufacturer)
Reported daily
fatty acid regimen(s)
(use as adjunctive,
monotherapy or mixed)
Placebo
content
Duration
(days)
Outcome
measure
Rater
(missing)
Quality
score
Trial
registration
Perera et al. [48] ADHD
98 (49/49)
9.3
73.4
Vegepa (Igennus Ltd., UK)
0.593 g ω3 FAsþ0.362 g ω6 FAs
(adjunctive)
Sunﬂower oil
180
Local language
questionnaire
[49]
Parent
9
No
Richardson
et al. [73]
Reading
impairment
362 (180/
182)
8.7
53.0
DHASCO (Martek Biosciences Inc.,
USA)
0.6 g DHA (monotherapy)
corn/soybean oil
(taste matched)
112
Connersj
Parent
11
Yes
Teacher
NCT01066182
ACTeRS¼ADD-H Comprehensive Teacher Rating Scale [81]; ADHD-RS¼ADHD rating scale [82]; CBCL¼Child Behavior Checklist [83]; DCD¼developmental coordination disorder; DBD¼Disruptive Behavior Disorders rating scale [84];
RBPC¼Revised Behavior Problem Checklist [85].
a Cross-over design.
b Conners' (1969) Teachers Questionnaire [74].
c Revised Conners' parent and teacher rating scales [75].
d Conners' Parent Rating Scale, Long Version (CPRS-L) [76].
e Conners' Abbreviated Symptom Questionnaire [77].
f Scores counted only if both parent and teacher gave the same assessment.
g Conners' Teacher Rating Scales, Long Version (CTRS-L) [76].
h Conners Rating Scales–Revised [78].
i Conners' Rating Scales for Parents (CPRS, short form) and for Teachers (CTRS, short form) [79].
j Conners' Rating Scales for Parents (CPRS, long form) and for Teachers (CTRS, long form) [80].
B.K. Puri, J.G. Martins / Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 90 (2014) 179–189
182
inactive. PUFA proﬁles of all regimens used across the 18 studies are
shown in Supplementary eTable 1. For a summary of the omega-3
and omega-6 biosynthetic pathways, see Supplementary eFig. 2.
2.4. Statistical methods
Standardized mean differences (SMDs) in inattention, hyperactive-
impulsive, and combined ADHD symptoms scores were computed
using the program Comprehensive Meta-Analysis (http://www.meta-a
nalysis.com/), identiﬁed as one of the best software tools for this
purpose in a recent systematic review [52]. The program allows mean
effect sizes to be computed in studies that use multiple outcome
measures; for example, two different questionnaire measures of ADHD
symptoms plus a categorical measure of clinical improvement, allow-
ing all available data relating to ADHD symptoms to be included in
this analysis. We have previously shown that this strategy is more
Fig. 1. (A) Forest plot for all 18 studies of standardized difference in mean of combined ADHD symptom scores (inattention and hyperactive-impulsive) rated by all raters.
(B) Funnel plot for all 18 studies of precision (1/standard error) by standardized difference in mean of combined ADHD symptom scores (inattention and hyperactive-
impulsive) rated by all raters. Observed studies are shown in open circles with the associated estimate in an open diamond (SMD 0.192; 95% CI: 0.297, 0.086). Imputed
studies are shown in solid circles with the adjusted estimate in a solid diamond (SMD 0.118; 95% CI: 0.250, 0.014). DHA, docosahexaenoic acid; EPA, eicosapentaenoic
acid; FA-PL, fatty acid enriched phospholipids; FO, ﬁsh oil; LA, linoleic acid.
B.K. Puri, J.G. Martins / Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 90 (2014) 179–189
183
conservative and less likely to introduce bias than using an investi-
gator-determined hierarchical scheme to select which outcome mea-
sure to enter into the meta-analysis [53].
In studies that measured outcomes rated by both parents and
teachers, ﬁve of these failed to report negative outcomes from one
or other rater [46,47,54–56]. In four of these studies [47,54–56],
we were unable to obtain the missing data from authors; there-
fore, SMDs of zero with a standard error equal to that of the
reported outcome were used to impute these missing data in order
to reduce the risk of overestimation of treatment effects conse-
quent to reporting bias. The Hirayama et al. [45] study rated ADHD
symptoms by both parents and teachers but scores were counted
only when both raters gave the same assessment. Whilst this
strategy was consistent with diagnostic requirements that ADHD
symptoms be present in more than one context, it is potentially
open to bias as ‘same assessment’ was not deﬁned. We contacted
the author but individual parent and teacher ratings were not
available and, given the composite nature of the outcome used in
this study, we were unable to impute the missing data.
The meta-analytic strategy employed was as follows: (i) to com-
pute overall effect sizes using a random effects model for combined
ADHD symptoms, and inattention and hyperactive-impulsive symp-
toms separately, rated by both parents and teachers combined, and
by parents and teachers separately; (ii) to examine for possible
publication bias using funnel plots, Egger's test, and Duval and
Tweedie's trim and ﬁll method; (iii) to assess heterogeneity using
Cohen's Q; and (iv) to explore heterogeneity with univariable and
multivariable random effects meta-regression analyses using relevant
moderator variables (baseline symptom scores, study duration, study
sample size, study quality, mean age of children in each study,
percentage of male children in each study, and individual PUFA
doses). Meta-regression analyses were conducted with the metafor
package in R, available via the Comprehensive R Archive Network at
http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=metafor,
using
the
restricted
maximum likelihood estimator and Knapp and Hartung adjustment.
The latter adjustment generates more conservative P-values for
model parameters and an overall F-test of the signiﬁcance of
moderators in the model.
In order to reduce the number of variables simultaneously
entered into the multivariable meta-regression analyses, fatty acid
doses were summed into AAþprecursors (18:2n6 LA, 18:3n6
γ-linolenic
acid
[GLA],
20:2n6
eicosadienoic
acid
[EDA],
20:3n6
dihomo-γ-linolenic
acid
[DGLA]),
EPAþprecursors
(18:3n3 ALA, 18:4n3 stearidonic acid [SDA], 20:3n3 eicosa-
trienoic acid [ETA], 20:4n3 eicosatetraenoic acid [ETTA]) and
DHAþprecursor (22:5n3 docosapentaenoic acid [DPA]). If any
one of these groups were signiﬁcant, between-group interactions
and individual within-group fatty acids were tested to obtain the
best ﬁtting model on the basis of the F-test for moderators.
Statistical signiﬁcance was established using αo0.05 without
adjustment for multiple comparisons as this investigation was
considered to be an exploratory analysis.
3. Results
The overall effect using a random effects model showed a small
but signiﬁcant decrease in combined ADHD symptoms rated by all
raters with PUFA supplementation in the 18 studies (Fig. 1A); SMD
0.192 (95% CI: 0.297, 0.086; Po0.001). The effect remained
signiﬁcant for both inattention and hyperactive-impulsive symp-
toms when examined separately and rated by all raters (Table 2).
However, these signiﬁcant effects appeared to be mediated by
parent ratings as SMD estimates using parent ratings were con-
sistently higher than those using all raters and SMD estimates
using teacher ratings were consistently insigniﬁcant (Table 2).
Egger's test was not signiﬁcant (intercept 0.717; 95% CI:
2.048, 0.614; df¼18; P¼0.272); however, there was evidence
of publication bias as shown by the asymmetrical funnel plot
(Fig. 1B). Using Duval and Tweedie's trim and ﬁll, ﬁve additional
imputed studies (solid circles) were needed to correct the asym-
metry of the observed studies (open circles), which reduced the
SMD estimate to a non-signiﬁcant level of 0.118 (95% CI: 0.250,
0.014).
Although there was little evidence of statistically signiﬁcant
heterogeneity between studies (Table 2), a wide range of PUFA
regimens were employed and thus, the studies were heterogeneous
with respect to the clinical interventions employed. Univariable and
multivariable meta-regression analyses were conducted to explore
the possible inﬂuence of these heterogeneous PUFA regimens on
outcome.
On univariable meta-regression analysis, study duration (SMD
0.098; 95% CI: 0.193, 0.003; P¼0.043), EDA dose (SMD
49.406; 95% CI: 95.634, 3.179; P¼0.038), and DGLA dose
(SMD 25.956; (5% CI: 50.000, 1.911; P¼0.036)) were sig-
niﬁcantly associated with decreases in combined ADHD symptoms
(Supplementary eTable 2). EPA dose was associated with a
decrease in combined ADHD symptoms, but this decrease was
not statistically signiﬁcant (SMD 0.328; 95% CI: 0.674, 0.018;
P¼0.062). DHA dose was associated with an increase in combined
ADHD symptoms, but this increase was not statistically signiﬁcant
(SMD 0.197; 95% CI: 0.167, 0.560; P¼0.271).
On multivariable meta-regression analysis, the following ﬁndings
were identiﬁed. For all ADHD symptoms combined, precursors up to
Table 2
Effect by ADHD symptom category and rater.
Model
Number of studies
SMD estimate (95% CI)
Z
P of Z
Q
P of Q
All ADHD symptoms combined
All raters
18
0.192 (0.297 to 0.086)
3.566
o0.001
19.300
0.438
Parent
14
0.275 (0.416 to 0.134)
3.823
o0.001
20.350
0.159
Teacher or Clinician
12
0.074 (0.197 to 0.049)
1.176
0.240
8.892
0.632
Inattention symptoms
All raters
16
0.162 (0.276 to 0.047)
2.764
0.006
17.332
0.364
Parent
12
0.282 (0.464 to 0.100)
3.037
0.002
23.688
0.022
Teacher or Clinician
10
0.069 (0.196 to 0.059)
1.053
0.292
7.143
0.622
Hyperactiveimpulsive symptoms
All raters
16
0.209 (0.358 to 0.059)
2.740
0.006
26.136
0.052
Parent
13
0.263 (0.437 to 0.089)
2.966
0.003
24.333
0.028
Teacher or Clinician
10
0.034 (0.163 to 0.096)
0.510
0.610
8.867
0.450
SMD, standardized mean difference.
B.K. Puri, J.G. Martins / Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 90 (2014) 179–189
184
and including AA plus the interaction between precursors up to and
including AA and precursors up to and including EPA (but not
precursors up to and including DHA) were signiﬁcantly associated
with a decrease in symptoms after controlling for background factors
(baseline symptoms, study duration, sample size, study quality, mean
age and percentage of male children). For inattention symptoms,
similar ﬁndings of an interaction between precursors up to and
including AA and precursors up to and including EPA were evident,
but speciﬁcally, the best ﬁtting model (highly signiﬁcant F-test of
moderators and very low residual heterogeneity) identiﬁed that GLA
and the interaction between GLA and EPA were the key PUFAs
signiﬁcantly associated with a decrease in inattention symptoms
after controlling for background factors (See Model 8 in Table 3). For
hyperactive symptoms, the background factors of baseline hyperac-
tive symptoms, study duration, and study sample size were signiﬁ-
cantly associated with changes in hyperactive symptoms; however,
PUFA supplementation was not (Table 3).
A subgroup analysis dividing the studies on the basis of whether
GLA and EPA were present in combination (threshold values Z1 mg
for both GLA and EPA) showed that the pooled SMD in inattention
symptoms (rated by all raters) was signiﬁcantly lower for the
GLAþEPA
present
group
(0.309;
95%
CI:
0.462,
0.155;
Table 3
Multivariable meta-regression models to explore the inﬂuence of moderator variables on residual heterogeneity in combined ADHD, inattention, and hyperactive-impulsive
symptoms (rated by all raters).
Model
Moderator variable
SMD estimate (95% CI)
t-Value
P-value
Overall test of moderators
Test of residual heterogeneity
F
P-value
Q
P-value
All ADHD symptoms combined
1.
Baseline symptoms (all)
0.010 (0.005, 0.025)
1.385
0.189
2.617
0.069
8.742
0.792
Study duration (months)
0.175 (0.295, 0.054)
3.128
0.008
Sample size
0.0004 (0.001, 0.002)
0.539
0.599
Study quality score
0.027 (0.048, 0.103)
0.778
0.451
Mean age (years)
0.001 (0.148, 0.147)
0.011
0.992
Percent male
0.007 (0.021, 0.007)
1.138
0.276
2.
Study duration (months)
0.179 (0.273, 0.086)
4.077
0.001
6.698
0.003
6.927
0.960
AAþprecursors
0.209 (0.346, 0.072)
3.255
0.005
EPAþprecursors
0.161 (0.399, 0.076)
1.446
0.169
DHAþprecursors
0.189 (0.071, 0.448)
1.549
0.142
3.
Study duration (months)
0.169 (0.264, 0.073)
3.768
0.002
6.129
0.004
7.326
0.948
AAþprecursors
0.190 (0.336, 0.044)
2.771
0.014
AAþprecursors-by-EPAþprecursors
0.686 (1.358, 0.015)
2.178
0.046
AAþprecursors-by-DHAþprecursors
0.152 (0.445, 0.748)
0.541
0.596
4.
Study duration (months)
0.158 (0.251, 0.065)
3.593
0.002
7.495
0.002
8.024
0.948
GLA
1.242 (2.192, 0.291)
2.769
0.014
GLA-by-EPA
4.39 (9.303, 0.523)
1.894
0.076
Inattention symptoms
5.
Baseline symptoms (Inat)
0.06 (0.031, 0.020)
0.493
0.633
2.345
0.114
9.729
0.640
Study duration (months)
0.140 (0.282, 0.003)
2.184
0.054
Sample size
0.0004 (0.003, 0.002)
0.447
0.664
Study quality score
0.028 (0.066, 0.122)
0.660
0.524
Mean age (years)
0.006 (0.162, 0.149)
0.092
0.929
Percent male
0.008 (0.029, 0.013)
0.849
0.416
6.
Study duration (months)
0.180 (0.263, 0.097)
4.729
0.001
9.536
0.001
4.148
0.981
AAþprecursors
0.320 (0.477, 0.163)
4.446
0.001
EPAþprecursors
0.193 (0.403, 0.018)
1.990
0.070
DHAþprecursors
0.043 (0.192, 0.278)
0.398
0.697
7.
Study duration (months)
0.176 (0.255, 0.098)
4.886
o0.001
10.920
0.001
3.735
0.988
AAþprecursors
0.268 (0.427, 0.108)
3.648
0.003
AAþprecursors-by-EPAþprecursors
0.545 (1.080, 0.010)
2.219
0.047
AAþprecursors-by-DHAþprecursors
0.092 (0.592, 0.407)
0.403
0.694
8.
Study duration (months)
0.171 (0.236, 0.107)
5.740
o0.001
20.658
o0.001
3.005
0.998
GLA
1.952 (2.818, 1.085)
4.867
o0.001
GLA-by-EPA
4.210 (7.636, 0.785)
2.655
0.020
Hyperactive–impulsive symptoms
9.
Baseline symptoms (HI)
0.019 (0.001, 0.036)
2.410
0.037
4.277
0.021
7.329
0.694
Study duration (months)
0.240 (0.373, 0.107)
4.014
0.003
Sample size
0.002 (0.001, 0.004)
1.662
0.128
Study quality score
0.034 (0.047, 0.115)
0.929
0.375
Mean age (years)
0.006 (0.144, 0.156)
0.088
0.932
Percent male
0.003 (0.021, 0.015)
0.361
0.725
10.
Baseline symptoms (HI)
0.015 (0.002, 0.029)
2.500
0.031
7.599
0.003
4.701
0.910
Study duration (months)
0.248 (0.353, 0.142)
5.223
o0.001
Sample size
0.001 (00.0003, 0.003)
2.858
0.017
AAþprecursors
0.152 (0.316, 0.011)
2.075
0.065
EPAþprecursors
0.106 (0.442, 0.230)
0.705
0.497
DHAþprecursors
0.174 (0.126, 0.474)
1.293
0.225
GLA¼18:3-n6 γ-linolenic acid; AA¼20:4-n6 arachidonic acid; EPA¼20:5-n3 eicosapentaenoic acid; DHA¼22:6-n3 docosahexaenoic acid; HI¼hyperactive-impulsive;
Inat¼Inattention.; SMD¼standardized mean difference. Signiﬁcant p-values (po0.05) are shown in bold.
B.K. Puri, J.G. Martins / Prostaglandins, Leukotrienes and Essential Fatty Acids 90 (2014) 179–189
185
Po0.0001) but not signiﬁcantly different for the GLAþEPA not pre-
sent group (0.012; 95% CI: 0.161, 0.137; P¼0.875). See Fig. 2 for a
forest plot of this subgroup analysis.
4.

## Clinical Significance
conclusions
on overall effectiveness of PUFAs [27–29], the differential efﬁcacy
of
eicosapentaenoic
acid
(EPA)
versus
docosahexaenoic
acid
(DHA) [27], the role of combined omega-6 and omega-3 PUFA
supplementation [28], and the inﬂuence of symptom rater blind-
ing [29], we carried out an exploratory meta-regression analysis of
ADHD trials examining the role of PUFAs with no a priori assump-
tion concerning which PUFA might or might not be effective in
alleviating symptoms of ADHD. To achieve this we performed a
meta-analysis of rating scale outcomes adjusted for reporting bias
in combination with meta-regression analyses using data from
independent fatty acid content analyses of study regimens, which
to our knowledge has not previously been undertaken.
2.

## References
References
[1] M.L. Wolraich, R.E. McKeown, S.N. Visser, et al., The prevalence of ADHD: its
diagnosis and treatment in four school districts across two States, J. Atten.
Disord. (2012) ([PubMed ID: 22956714]).
[2] N.B. Minkoff, ADHD in managed care: an assessment of the burden of illness
and proposed initiatives to improve outcomes, Am. J. Manag. Care 15 (2009)
S151–S159 ([PubMed ID: 19601690]).
[3] A. De Ridder, D. De Graeve, Healthcare use, social burden and costs of children
with and without...
---
