---
# untitled
**Autores**: Not specified
**Año**: 2010
**Journal**: Scientific Paper
**DOI/Link**: N/A

## Abstract
Not found

## Key Findings
discussion. Murphy and colleagues64 and Weissenbacher
and colleagues65 argue that it could be the sole cause of anti-
correlated resting state networks in functional connectivity
analyses. We decided to use global scaling because we were
not analyzing anticorrelations in this paradigm and because
data presented by Fox and colleagues66 and Weissenbacher
and coworkers65 indicate that global scaling enhances the de-
tection of system-specific correlations and doubles connec-
tion specificity. Weissenbacher and colleagues65 compared
different preprocessing approaches in human and simulated
data sets and recommend applying global scaling to maxi-
mize the specificity of positive resting-state correlations. We
used high-pass filtering with a cut-off at 128 seconds to mini-
mize the impact of serial autocorrelations in the fMRI time
series that can result from scanner drift.
Psychophysiological interaction analysis
We conducted novel analyses on a sample of patients who
had been scanned for a... (Extracted from Discussion)

## Methodology
Methods: We performed a working memory task and psychophysiologic interaction analyses
with the posterior cingulate cortex and the medial prefrontal cortex as seed regions during fixation in 12 patients with severe, chronic
PTSD and 12 healthy controls.

## Results
Results: During the working memory task, the control group showed significantly stronger connectivity
with areas implicated in the salience and executive networks, including the right inferior frontal gyrus and the right inferior parietal lobule.
The PTSD group showed stronger connectivity with areas implicated in the default mode network, namely enhanced connectivity be-
tween the posterior cingulate cortex and the right superior frontal gyrus and between the medial prefrontal cortex and the left parahip-
pocampal gyrus. Limitations: Because we were studying alterations in patients with severe, chronic PTSD, we could not exclude pa-
tients taking medication. The small sample size may have limited the power of our analyses. To avoid multiple testing in a small sample,
we only used 2 seed regions for our analyses.

## Clinical Significance
Conclusion: The different patterns of connectivity imply significant group differences with
task-induced switches (i.e., engaging and disengaging the default mode network and the central-executive network).
Research Paper
Switching between executive and default mode 
networks in posttraumatic stress disorder: alterations
in functional connectivity
Judith K. Daniels, PhD; Alexander C. McFarlane, MD; Robyn L. Bluhm, PhD; 
Kathryn A. Moores, PhD; C. Richard Clark, PhD; Marnie E. Shaw, PhD; 
Peter C. Williamson, MD; Maria Densmore, BSc; Ruth A. Lanius, MD, PhD
Daniels, Williamson, Densmore, Lanius — Department of Psychiatry, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, The University
of Western Ontario, London, Ont.; Daniels — University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, University of Hamburg, Germany;
McFarlane — The Centre of Military and Veterans’ Health and Department of Psychiatry, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, 
Australia; Bluhm — Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies, Old Dominion University, Norfolk, Va.; Moores, Clark —
Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, School of Psychology, Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia; Shaw — Brain Research 
Institute, Florey Neuroscience Institutes, Melbourne, Australia 
Introduction
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is characterized by dis-
turbances in concentration and memory1 that have been
linked to underlying alterations in working memory perfor-
mance compared with both healthy controls with no expo-
sure to trauma2 and healthy controls with trauma exposure.3–5
In a recent article, data were presented that indicate abnor-
mal recruitment of network regions involved in working
memory updating during a simple working memory mainte-
nance task in patients with PTSD.6 Subtraction analyses of
these data supported the notion that attending to simple
working memory tasks, like those requiring only mainte-
nance, demand a greater effort in PTSD patients than in
Correspondence to: Dr. R.A. Lanius, University Campus, London Health Sciences Centre, 339 Windermere Rd., London ON  N6A 5A5; 
fax 519 663-3935; ruth.lanius@lhsc.on.ca
J Psychiatry Neurosci 2010;35(4):258-66.
Submitted Dec. 2, 2009; Revised Feb. 11, 2010; Accepted Feb. 11, 2010.
DOI: 10.1503/jpn.090175
Executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder
J Psychiatry Neurosci 2010;35(4)
259
healthy controls; this possibly explains the concentration
problems described in the DSM-IV diagnostic criteria for
PTSD. Studies also have connected PTSD symptomatology
with diminished connectivity of the default mode network
during rest.7,8 Because the ability to effortlessly switch be-
tween concentration on a task and an idling state during rest
may be implicated in both these alterations, we undertook a
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study with a
block design and a comparatively short fixation condition to
study the underlying functional connectivity of areas in the
default mode network during a low-demand fixation condi-
tion and a complex task.
Whereas a previous neuroimaging study showed evidence
of attenuated connectivity during the resting state among de-
fault mode network regions in PTSD patients during a rela-
tively long resting-state condition,7 modulations in connectiv-
ity due to task-induced switching between default mode
networks and central-executive and salience networks have
yet to be studied. To examine the effects of working memory
load on connectivity in these networks, we used psychophys-
iologic interaction analyses to examine connectivity with
seed regions in the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and the
posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) in patients with severe,
chronic PTSD and matched, healthy controls.
Recent neuroimaging studies have lead to the hypothesis
that rest is characterized by an organized baseline level of ac-
tivity that is attenuated during goal-oriented mental activity.
It has been hypothesized that the brain maintains this “de-
fault mode” in the absence of cognitive demands,9–11 possibly
to facilitate a state of readiness to respond to environmental
changes.12 Other authors have linked default mode network
activity to self-referential processing because key regions like
the posterior cingulate PCC and mPFC have been shown to
subserve introspective mental imagery, self-reflection and
self-awareness.13–16 A recent meta-analysis17 identified various
areas as components of the default mode network, such as
the PCC, anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), middle temporal
gyrus and mPFC. The stability of the default mode network
across the lifespan18–20 as well as across different states (light
sedation21), wakefulness and early stages of sleep22 has been
shown, and the functional connectivity was matched by a
computational model with high fidelity.23
Tasks that activate the executive network have been consis-
tently shown to evoke decreased activation (deactivation) in
the default mode network. McKiernan and colleagues24
showed that task-related deactivation increased with task dif-
ficulty. Two previous studies25,26 examined the connectivity of
the default mode network during very demanding cognitive
tasks and found significantly diminished functional connec-
tivity within the default mode network under high working
memory load.
Different groups have recently discussed the notion that
the default mode network might comprise different subsys-
tems.16,27 Uddin and colleagues28 revealed considerable differ-
ences by analyzing the anticorrelations of seed regions in the
mPFC and PCC, suggesting that the activity of distinct nodes
of the default mode network may differentially modulate ac-
tivity in task-positive networks. They suggest that future re-
search should therefore distinguish between these network
components and analyze their connectivity separately.
Alterations in default mode network connectivity have
emerged as possible markers for psychiatric disorders such
as schizophrenia,29 social phobia,30 depression,31 bipolar disor-
der32 and autism.33 In PTSD, altered functional connectivity 
in default mode network regions has been shown using 
emotion-relevant paradigms such as facial affect perception
and trauma script–driven imagery.34–36 A recent study carried
out by our group analyzed functional connectivity of seed re-
gions in the PCC and the mPFC separately during rest in
PTSD patients and healthy controls.7 Direct comparison be-
tween groups showed significantly reduced connectivity
among default mode network areas in the PTSD group. The
PTSD group still showed some, although diminished, con-
nectivity between the PCC seed region and the right superior
frontal gyrus (Brodmann area [BA] 9) and left thalamus;
however, connectivity of the mPFC seed region was strictly
limited to adjunct areas in the mPFC. A prospective study in
a group of acutely traumatized patients8 showed that resting-
state connectivity of the PCC with the right amygdala pre-
dicts future PTSD symptoms, suggesting that the integrity of
the default mode network is compromised in PTSD and that
the extent of these deficits reflects clinical measures of PTSD.
To extend our knowledge about the specificity of these alter-
ations, experimental paradigms that manipulate the activity
of the default mode network are needed.
In this study, we investigated the relation between the
task-negative default mode network and task-positive net-
works involved in switching to working memory updating.
It has been suggested that there are 2 differentiable task-
positive networks: a “salience network” that includes the
dorsal ACC and the orbitofrontal-insular cortices, and an
“executive-control network” that connects the dorsolateral
frontal cortex with the parietal cortex.37,38 Converging evi-
dence for the executive system stems from studies describing
the same network structures across a variety of executive-
type tasks.39–43 The salience network, which encompasses the
frontoinsular circuit and the anterior cingulate, is uniquely
positioned to initiate the control of signals that activate the
central-executive network.38,44–47 It has been linked to monitoring
task performance48 and the modulation of arousal during
cognitively demanding tasks.49
These networks mediate higher-order control and likely 
facilitate the disengagement of systems that are not task-
relevant, including the default mode network.46,50 Recent
studies have therefore emphasized the salience and executive
networks as being critically involved in switching from an
idling state into a task-oriented state.38,45,51,52 Therefore, we hy-
pothesized that the relative engagement of these networks is
central to the differences in the ability of PTSD patients to en-
gage and disengage from tasks.
We sought to determine whether connectivity with the de-
fault mode network nodes differs significantly within the 
2 groups between working memory task and the control con-
dition and whether connectivity alterations between groups
emerge when comparing the working memory task with the
control condition in PTSD patients and healthy controls.
Based on recent publications indicating that the default
mode network might exhibit more internal differentiation
than generally assumed,28 it seemed plausible that the con-
nectivity patterns for the 2 seed regions would also differ be-
tween the PTSD group and the control group. We therefore
hypothesized that during the working memory task, both
seed regions would show greater connectivity with areas of
networks involved in attending to the task (such as the
salience network and the executive network) in healthy con-
trols than in PTSD patients.
Methods
Participants
We included 12 patients with PTSD and 12 controls who had
not experienced trauma. We matched controls to patients
based on years of education, occupational status and esti-
mated verbal intelligence quotient based on the National
Adult Reading Test.53 Participants were all right-handed and
gave written informed consent to participate. We excluded
those with head injury or loss of consciousness (> 1 h), major
illness, hospitalization or general anesthetic (≤2 yr prior),
epilepsy, neurologic, learning or developmental disorders, or
current psychopathology diagnosed by use of the Diagnostic
Interview Schedule–Screening Interview (DISSI54).
Psychiatrists at the Queen Elizabeth Hospital (Adelaide,
South Australia) diagnosed PTSD according to DSM-IV cri -
ter ia.55 We assessed comorbidity using the Composite Inter-
national Diagnostic Interview (CIDI, DSM-IV Version 2.1;
www.whocidi.org/instruments_papi.php), and we excluded
patients with current panic disorder, lifetime psychosis or al-
cohol abuse or dependence within the preceding year.
Ethics approval was obtained for this study from the Social
and Behavioural Research Ethics Committee at Flinders Uni-
versity and the Research Ethics Committee at the Royal Ade-
laide Hospital.
Psychological measures
Trained clinical interviewers measured PTSD symptom
severity (Table 1) using the Clinician-Administered PTSD
Scale (CAPS56) and the Impact of Event Scale (IES22). All par-
ticipants completed the General Health Questionnaire
(GHQ57), the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI58) and the State-
Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI59). For information about neu-
ropsychological measures, please refer to a previous article
on this data set.6
Activation and control tasks
We investigated the integrity of the default mode network
during working memory processing to substantiate the link
between default mode network alterations and PTSD pathol-
ogy. We chose a 1-back working memory updating task be-
cause the neurofunctional substrate of working memory is not
limited to prefrontal cortex activation but requires the con-
certed interplay of widespread interacting networks including
the parietal cortex, subcortical regions and cerebellar areas.
We used a visuoverbal target detection task that required par-
ticipants to attend to a block of serially presented words on a
computer monitor and to detect infrequent targets by making
an appropriate finger response. The task manipulated work-
ing memory updating processes by using a flexible target
identity. The working memory task required participants to
attend to a serially presented set of words on a computer
monitor and to detect infrequent targets by making an appro-
priate finger response. The target was defined as any consecu-
tively repeated word, which required participants to continu-
ally update the target identity in working memory with each
new word presented throughout the block. 
The control condition was a simple fixation task, requiring
attention either to the response instruction or to a line of 5 as-
terisks in the centre of the screen. We chose this control task
to resemble the activation task as closely as possible; it there-
fore differed considerably from previous resting state analy-
ses because it was relatively short in duration and thus neces-
sitated fast switches between the control condition and the
activation task. It also prompted the participants to keep their
eyes open and fixated on the stimulus, which has been
shown to result in stronger default mode network activations
than the closed-eyes condition.60
Study design
To ensure frequent switching between an idling state and
task-induced activation, we used a block design, presenting
the activation task (8 volumes) twice interspersed with the
fixation task (4 volumes) within each of 16 imaging runs.
Each task was preceded by an instruction block (4 volumes
duration), amounting to a total acquisition of 512 volumes
per participant. The order of the working memory tasks was
Daniels et al.
260
J Psychiatry Neurosci 2010;35(4)
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for psychological adjustment
measures for study participants
Group; mean (SD)
Psychological test scores
PTSD, n = 11
Controls, n = 12
Impact of Event Scale
22
Intrusions
30.18
(6.14)
—
Avoidance
29.73
(6.81)
—
Total
59.91
(7.19)
—
Clinical-Administered PTSD Scale
56
Frequency
41.50 (10.22)
—
Intensity
32.70
(7.90)
—
Total severity
74.20 (17.80)
—
B Severity
20.30
(8.30)
—
C Severity
28.20
(7.61)
—
D Severity
31.70 (20.56)
—
General Health Questionnaire
57*
18.73
(7.68)
3.37
(7.24)†
Beck Depression Inventory
58*
22.91 (11.95)
7.95
(7.97)†
State-Trait Anxiety Inventory
59*
State anxiety
41.73
(9.40)
29.95
(8.45)†
Trait anxiety
54.0
(15.49)
36.58 (10.74)†
PTSD = posttraumatic stress disorder; SD = standard deviation.
*Estimated means (adjusted for medication status).
†p < 0.05.
Executive and default mode networks in posttraumatic stress disorder
J Psychiatry Neurosci 2010;35(4)
261
counterbalanced between runs and across participants. Full
details of this working memory paradigm are provided in the
study by Moores and colleagues.6 There were 2 variations of
this task in each run concerning the elicited button press re-
sponse; however, because we were interested in the effects of
cognitive effort on default network connectivity, rather than
specific effects associated with a particular variation of the
task, we combined the response variations to model a single
“task” condition for this study. The control condition con-
sisted of periods of viewing either 5 asterisks in the centre of
the screen or a notice of which variation of the task would be
performed next.
The stimulus sequences consisted of 16 words for each
block (4 words repeated 4 times) selected without replace-
ment from a master list. The probability of any word includ-
ing targets was 25%. The master list comprised 338 concrete
nouns obtained from the MRC Psycholinguistic Database
(version 2.0061) that met the following criteria: (a) 4–7 letters,
(b) 2–3 syllables, (c) written frequency between 20 and 50
times62 and (d) no irregular plurals. Because we were investi-
gating trauma-neutral information processing, we excluded
words with emotive impact (128 words). The PTSD patients
reviewed the reduced master list to exclude any words with
personal emotive impact. Lowercase words were presented
in colour (red, blue, green, yellow) at the centre of a black
screen using Gentask software (Neurosoft Inc.). Word colour
was not relevant for this study. Stimuli were generated in 
Arial font (150 point) and presented with horizontal (4.54°)
and vertical (1.04°) visual angles. The fixation stimulus con-
sisted of a row of 5 asterisks presented in the centre of a black
screen, reflecting the average word length. Stimulus duration
(including asterisks) was constant at 300 ms and stimulus on-
set asynchrony varied pseudorandomly around 4 seconds
(standard deviation [SD] 0.2 s). Stimuli were rear projected
using an EPSON EMP-3300 (Seiko Epson Corp.) onto a
Daylite Insta-Theatre screen and viewed via a mirror located
on the head coil.
Magnetic resonance image data acquisition
We collected MRI data on a Siemens VISION (Magnotom
4000) 1.5-T MRI scanner with a circularly polarized head coil.
Two high-resolution T1-weighted sagittal structural MRI vol-
umes were obtained (magnetization-prepared rapid acquisi-
tion with gradient echo sequence, repetition time [TR] 9.7 ms,
echo time [TE] 4 ms, inversion time [TI] 200 ms, delay time
0 ms, flip angle 12°, field of view [FOV] 256 mm × 256 mm,
matrix 256 × 256, 180 slices, 1 mm isovoxels, scan time 8 min
20 s) for each participant. We used a specialized gradient
echo, echoplanar imaging trapezoidal mosaic sequence de-
veloped in the Functional Imaging Laboratory (Wellcome
Department of Imaging Neuroscience, University College
London, UK) in collaboration with Siemens. We acquired 
axial fMRI volumes every 3.494 seconds over the whole brain
(80 acquisitions per run, total time 4 min 39 s) in 34 slices (TR
0.76 ms, TE 50 ms, TD1 [echo time] 20 ms, TD2 [measurement
delay time] 188.2 ms, flip angle 90°, matrix 64 × 64, FOV
320 mm × 320 mm, pixel size 5 mm × 5 mm, slice thickness
4 mm with a 1-mm interslice gap yielding 5 mm 3 isovoxels).
No stimuli were presented during the acquisition of the first
3 volumes of each run while steady-state magnetization was
achieved.
Preprocessing of fMRI data
We performed image preprocessing steps and statistical
analysis using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM2, Well-
come Department of Neurology, London, UK; www.fil
.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm). We processed single participant data 
using standardized preprocessing steps (motion detection, re-
alignment, spatial normalization, Gaussian smoothing at 10 mm
full-width at half-maximum isotropic Gaussian filter) and a
general linear model. Global scaling removed differences
common to the whole brain within and between sessions in
global signal intensity.63 Recently, the use of this preprocess-
ing step in studies examining connectivity has been a subject
of

## References
References
1.
Moore SA. Cognitive abnormalities in posttraumatic stress disor-
der. Curr Opin Psychiatry 2009;22:19-24.
2.
Clark CR, McFarlane AC, Morris P, et al. Cerebral function in post-
traumatic stress disorder during verbal working memory updating: a
positron emission tomography study. Biol Psychiatry 2003;53:474-81.
3.
Vasterling JJ, Brailey K, Allain AN, et al. Attention, learning, and
memory performances and intellectual resources in Vietnam veterans:
PTSD and no disorder comparisons. ...
---
